READER,

Before I speak any thing of the Author, or of his Works, I think it
convenient to speak somthing of my self, and of my intention in setting
out this Translation, with my Annotations.

The Reputation that this Book hath amongst all the Europeans, since its
first coming out, which was in the year 1555. and the curiosity that from
time to time the learned have had to see the Mysteries contained in it,
unfolded: is a sufficient warrant for my undertaking.

Many better Pens (I confess) could have performed this work with better
success, but not with greater facility than I, having from my youth been
conversant with those that pretended or endeavered to know somthing in
it. Otherwise, it would have been impossible for a man of my profession
to wade through it. This Book was the first after my Primmer, wherein
I did learn to read, it being then the Custom in France, about the
year 1618. to initiate Children by that Book; First, because of the
crabbidness of the words; Secondly, that they might be acquainted with
the old and absolete French, such as is now used in the English Law;
and Thirdly, for the delightfulness and variety of the matter, so that
this Book in those days was printed every year like an Almanack, or a
Primer for Children. From that time, without any other Study than reading
of History, and observing the events of the world, and conversing with
those that made it their Study, (some of which were like to run mad about
it) I have attained to so much Knowledge, as to bring it into a Volume.

The Book is written in the Nature of Prophecies, digested into old
French Verses, most of which are very hard to be understood, and others
impossible at all, whether the Author did affect obscurity, or else
wanted the faculty to express himself, which is the cause that it could
not be rendred into English Verses, it being troublesome enough to be
understood in Prose, as the Reader will find. That’s the reason that I
have translated it almost word for word, to make it as plain as I could;
as also because the Reader (if curious of it) may benefit himself in the
knowledge of the French Tongue, by comparing the English and French
together. The rest that can be said upon this subject, you shall find
either in the Authors Life, or in the Appology made for him.

And because I have told you before, that many have been like to run mad
by over-studying these, and other Prophecies, give me leave to give you
this advice, that in vain, or at least without any great profit, thou
shalt bestow thy time, care, and study upon it: for which I will give
thee the chief reasons, that have disswaded me from it.

The first is, that the thing it self, which you may think to understand,
is not certain in it self; because the Author disguiseth it in several
manners, sometimes speaking a double sense, as that of the ancient Oracle.

    Aio te Æacida Romanos vincere posse.

Which is to be understood two ways, and cannot be determinated, till the
event of it be past.

It is true, that the Author doth mark so many particular Circumstances,
that when the thing is come to pass, every one may clearly see that
he pretended to Prophecie that particular thing. And besides he doth
sometimes deliver the thing in so obscure terms, that without a peculiar
Genius, it is almost impossible to understand it.

The second is, that though the Prophecie be true in it self, yet no body
knoweth, neither the time, nor how: For example, he plainly foretelleth,
that the Parliament of England should put their King to death;
nevertheless no body could tell, nor when, nor how, till the thing was
come to pass, nor what King it should be, till we had seen it.

The third is, that he marketh the times with Astrological terms, viz.
when such and such Planets, shall be in such and such Signs; but as
those Planets are often here, and go out of it, and come there again, no
certain judgement can be made of it.

The fourth is, that many times he giveth some peculiar Circumstances to
those he speaketh of, which may be found in others. Thus the Royal first
born might have been applied to Lewis the XIII. to Lewis the XIV. to
the first born of Philip the II. and Philip the III. King of Spain,
and to Kings of England, Father and Son. Nevertheless we find that this
word Royal first born, was intended for Henry IV. Grandfather on his
Mothers side, as we shall shew hereafter. This being so, it cannot be
expounded, but after the event.

The fifth is, that the knowledge of future things, belongeth to
God alone, and no body can pretend by any study, to have a certain
acquisition of it in all its Circumstances.

The sixth is, that the orders of Gods providence, which cause the several
events in all States, will not permit that men should have a publick
notion of his designs, sometimes he revealeth them to his Servants, or to
some particular man as he pleaseth, but he will not have them to be known
among the common sort of men.

The seventh, is the experience we have had of many, who pretending
to understand the Author, have made a quantity of false Prophecies,
expounding the Stanza’s according to their fancy, as if God had given
them the same understanding that he gave the Author, and what ought
to confirm us more in this point, is, that they have expounded some
Prophecies, as if they were to come to pass, which were past already, by
which we see the darkness of humane wit, who without authority pretendeth
to bite into the forbidden fruit of knowledge.

The eighth is, that this knowledge is no way profitable for the Vulgar;
because those things being decreed by God, they shall come to pass
without forceing our liberty, nor hindering the contingency of sublunary
things, where we must observe that the Prophecies which were revealed to
men, are many times conditional, as we see in that of Jonas against
Ninive, but those that they have left in writing for the times that
should come after them, are absolutely true, and shall infallibly come
to pass, as they have foretold them. This no ways hindereth, but God may
reveal some secrets of his to private men, for their benefit, and that
of their friends, without imparting it to the Vulgar, who may be, should
laugh at them.

The ninth is, that God hath peculiarly reserved to himself the knowledge
of times. Daniel, by a special favour, knew the end of the Babylonian
Captivity, and the time of the Messiah’s birth, and yet the
interpreters can scarce yet expound clearly the meaning of the seventy
weeks of Daniel, and we see, that since 1600 years ago, holy men, from
age to age, have foretold the proximity of Dooms-day, and the coming of
Antichrist.

The tenth is, that the foretelling of future things in this Author, is
for the most part included in business of State, and one might be guilty
of a criminal temerity, if he would discover things that concern us not,
and the concealing of which, is commended by all prudent persons, seeing
that we owe respect, love, and submission to those that bear rule over us.

For these reasons (dear Reader) I would not have thee intangle thy self
in the pretentions of knowing future things. If you have light concerning
them, keep thine own secret, and make use of it for thy self: Preserve
peace, and let the Almighty govern the World: for he can turn all things
to his Glory, and may when he pleaseth, raise up some Wits that will make
known unto us, what we desire, without any further trouble to our selves.
Before I make an end, I cannot but acquaint thee for gratitude sake, of
my Obligation to several persons, which have lent me Books, to help me
towards the finishing of this work, as namely that worthy Gentleman, and
the Honour of his profession Mr. Francis Bernard, Apothecary to St.
Bartholemews Hospital, and Mr. Philip Auberton Gentleman, belonging
to the Right Honourable the Earl of Bridgwater. Farewell.




THE

LIFE

OF

Michael Nostradamus,

Physitian in Ordinary to HENRY the II. and CHARLES the IX. Kings of
France.


Michael Nostradamus, the most renowned and famous Astrologer, that hath
been these many Ages, was born in St. Remy, a Town of Provence, in
the year 1503. upon a Thursday, the 14th of December, about noon.
His father was James Nostradamus, a Notary of the said Town, his
Mother was Renata of St. Remy, whose Grandfathers by the Fathers and
Mothers side, were men very skilfull, in Mathematick and Physick, one
having been Physitian to Renatus, King of Jerusalem, and Sicily,
and Earl of Provence, and the other Physition to John, Duke of
Calabria, Son to the said Renatus, whence cometh that our Author
saith in his Commentaries, that he hath received from hand to hand the
Knowledge of Mathematicks, from his ancient Progenitors. After the death
of his great Grandfather by the Mothers side, who first gave him a
slight tincture, and made him in love with the Mathematicks, he was sent
to School to Avignon. After that he went to Mount Pelier, to study
Philosophy and Physick, till a great Plague coming, he was compelled to
go to Narbonne, Thoulouse, and Bourdeaux, where he first began
to practise, being then about 22 years of age. Having lived four years
in those parts, he went back again to Monpelier, to get his degrees,
which he did with a great deal of applause. Going to Thoulouse, he
past through Agen, where Julius Cæsar Scaliger stayed him, with
whom he was very familiar and intimately acquainted, though they fell
out afterward; there he took to wife a very honourable Gentlewoman, by
whom he had two Children, a Son and a Daughter, all which being dead,
and seeing himself alone, he resolved to retire himself into Provence
his Native Countrey. After he had gone to Marseille, he went to Aix,
where the Parliament of Provence sitteth, and was there kept three
years at the City Charges; because of the violent Plague that raged then
in the year 1546. as you may read in the Lord of Launay’s Book, called
the Theater of the World, who describeth that Plague according to the
informations our Author gave him. Thence he went to Salon de Craux, a
City distant from Aix one dayes Journey, and in the middle way between
Avignon and Marseille; there he Married his second Wife Anna Ponce
Genelle, by whom he had three Sons and one Daughter, the eldest was
Michael Nostradamus, who hath written some pieces of Astrology, Printed
at Paris in the year 1563.

The second was Cæsar Nostradamus, who hath deserved to be numbred among
the French Historians, by reason of the great Volume he hath written of
Provence.

The third was a Capuchine Frier. Cæsar did insert in his History the
propagation of that Order in Provence. The fourth was a Daughter.

Nostradamus having found by experience that the perfect knowledge of
Physick dependeth from that of Astrology, he addicted himself to it, and
as this Science wanteth no allurement, and that besides his Genius he had
a peculiar disposition and inclination to it; he made such a progress
in it, that he hath deserved the Title of the most illustrious one in
France, insomuch that making some Almanacks for recreation sake, he did
so admirably hit the conjuncture of events, that he was sought for far
and near.

This success was the cause of an extraordinary diminution of his fame;
for the Printers and Booksellers seeing his fame, did print and vent
abundance of false Almanacks under his name for lucre sake, whence it
came that his reputation suffered by it, and was the cause that the Lord
Pavillon wrote against him, and that the Poet Jodele made this bitter
Distichon.

    ~Nostra damus~ cum falsa damus, nam fallere nostrum est,
      Et cum falsa damus, nil nisi ~Nostra damus~.

To which may be answered.

    ~Nostra damus~ cum verba damus quæ ~Nostradamus~ dat,
      Nam quæcunque dedit nil nisi vera dedit.

Or thus

    Vera damus cum verba damus quæ ~Nostradamus~ dat,
      Sed cum ~Nostra damus~, nil nisi falsa damus.

Nevertheless the Beams of Truth did shine through the Clouds of Calumny;
for he was singularly esteemed of by the Grandees, Queen Katharine of
Medicis, who had a natural inclination to know future things.

And Henry the II. King of France, who sent for him to come to the
Court in the year 1556. and having had private conference with him about
things of great concernment, sent him honourably back again with many
gifts. He went from Salon to the Court upon the 14 of July in the
year 1555. and came to Paris upon the 15 of August. As soon as he
was come to Town, the Lord Constable of Montmorency went to see him
at his Inn, and presented him to the King, who received him with much
satisfaction, and commanded that his lodging should be at the Palace of
the Cardinal of Bourbon Archbishop of Sens.

There he was taken with the Gout for ten or twelve days, after which
his Majesty sent him one hundred Crowns in Gold in a Velvet Purse, and
the Queen as much. Their Majesties desired him to go to Blois to see
the Princes their Children, and to tell them his opinion of them. It
is certain that he did not tell them what he thought, considering the
Tragical end of those three Princes, viz. Francis the II. Charles
the IX. and Henry the III.

Having been so much honoured at Court, he went back again to Salon,
where he made an end of his last Centuries, two years after he dedicated
them to the King Henry the II. in the year 1557. and in his Luminary
Epistle discovereth unto him the future events that shall happen from the
Birth of Lewis the XIV. now Reigning, till the coming of Antichrist.

While he was at Salon he received there the Duke of Savoy, and
the Lady Margaret of France, Sister to Henry the II. who was to
Marry the said Duke according to the treaty of the general Peace made
at Cambresis, both entertained him very familiarly, and honoured him
often with their presence. The Duke came in October and the Lady in
December.

When Charles the IX. went a progress through his Kingdom, he came into
Provence, and did fail not to go to Salon to visit our Author, who in
the name of the Town went to salute him, and make a Speech, this was in
the year 1564. the 17 of November.

The extraordinary satisfaction that the King and the Queen Mother
received from him was such, that being both at Lion, they sent for him
again, and the King gave him 200 Crowns in Gold, and the Queen almost as
much, with the quality of Physician in Ordinary to the King, with the
Salaries and profits thereunto appertaining. Being come back to Salon
he lived about 16 Months longer, and died upon the 2 of July 1566.
in his Climacterical year of 63. having all his senses about him: His
Disease was a Gout at first, which turned into a Dropsie; the time of
his death it seemeth was known to him; for a friend of his witnesseth,
that at the end of June in the said year he had writen with his own
hand upon the Ephemerides of John Stavius these Latine words, Hic
prope mors est; that is, near here is my death, and the day before his
death that friend of his having waited on him till very late took his
leave, saying, I shall see you again to morrow morning, you shall not
see me alive when the Sun riseth, which proved true. He died a Roman
Catholick, having received all his Sacraments, and was solemnly buried in
the Church of the Franciscan Friers at Salon, on the left hand of the
Church door, where his Widow erected him a Marble Table fastened in the
Wall with this Epitaph, with his Figure to the Life, and his Arms above
it.

    The Inscription of his EPITAPH is in imitation of that of
    Titus Livius, and is thus.

                                D. M.

    Ossa clarissimi ~Michaelis Nostradami~, unius omnium pene
    mortalium digni, cujus Divino calamo totius Orbis ex astrorum
    influxu futuri eventus conscriberentur. Vixit annos ~LXII.~
    menses ~VI.~ dies ~X.~ Obiit. Salonæ ~CIↃ IↃLXVI~. ~Anna Pontia
    Gemella~, conjugi optimo. ~V. E.~

Which may be rendred thus:

    Here lies the Bones of the most famous Nostradamus, one who
    among Men hath deserved by the opinion of all, to set down in
    writting with a Quill almost Divine, the future Events of all
    the Universe, caused by the Cœlestial influences; he lived 62.
    years 6. Months and 10. days, he died at Salon, in the year
    1566.

               O Posterity do not grudge at his rest.

    Anna Pontia Gemella wisheth to her most loving Husband the
    true Happiness.

He had a Brother named John Nostradamus, famous for several Works that
he hath written, the Catalogue of which is in the Book of Mr. du Maine
de la Croix, Intitled, the Library.

As for our Author, he hath left several Works, among which is a Book of
Receits, for the preservation of health, Printed at Poitiers, in the
year 1556.

Another concerning the means of beautifying the Face and the Body,
that was Printed at Antwerp by Plantin in the year 1557. which
he Dedicated to his Brother John Nostradamus, an Attorney at the
Parliament of Aix.

Besides this, he Translated from Latine into French the Paraphases of
Galen, upon the Exhortation of Menedotus, which was Printed at Lyon
by Antony du Rhosne, in the year 1557.

But before we conclude, it will not be amiss to give some recreation to
the Reader, by relating a merry passage that happened to Nostradamus
being in Lorrain, for being in the Castle of Faim, belonging to the
Lord of Florinville, and having in cure the Mother of the said Lord; it
chanced one day that they both walking in the Yard, there was two little
Piggs, one white, and the other black, whereupon the Lord enquired of
Nostradamus in jest, what should become of these two Piggs? he answered
presently, we shall eat the black, and the Wolf shall eat the white.

The Lord Florinville intending to make him a Lyar, did secretly command
the Cook to dress the white for Supper; the Cook then killed the white,
drest it, and spitted it ready to be rosted when it should be time; In
the mean time having some business out of the Kitchin, a young tame Wolf
came in, and eat up the Buttocks of the white Pig, that was ready to be
rosted; the Cook coming in the mean time, and fearing least his Master
should be angry, took the black one, killed it, and drest it, and offered
it at Supper. Then the Lord thinking he had got the Victory, not knowing
what was befallen, said to Nostradamus, well Sir, we are eating now the
white Pigg, and the Wolf shall not touch it. I do not believe it (said
Nostradamus) it is the black one that is upon the Table. Presently the
Cook was sent for, who confessed the accident, the relation of which was
as pleasing to them as any meat.

In the same Castle of Faim, he told many that in a little Hill that
was near the Castle, there was a Treasure hidden, which should never be
found, if it were sought with design, but that it should be discovered
when the Hill should be digged for some other intent. There is a great
probability in this prediction, for there was an ancient Temple built
upon it, and when they dig there, many times several Antiquities are
found. All France telleth several Histories foretold by the Author, but
I am unwilling to write any thing without good warrant. His Stanza’s are
sufficient to prove the extraordinary Talent he had in foretelling future
things.




APOLOGY

FOR

Michael Nostradamus.




CHAP. I.


It is not unusual for Calumny to follow the best Wits, and those whom God
hath endowed with so extraordinary Talent, upon weak and slight grounds.
It is not also unusual for Men to side easier with calumny against
innocent persons, then with those truths that justifie them; therefore
no body ought to wonder, if Michael Nostradamus hath been so much
cried down and defamed by several Authors, being in the number of those
extraordinary persons, whom God had priviledged with that grace so much
desired by curious Men, viz. the knowledge of future events.

Besides that, there was four things in him, which might have been the
grounds of this diffamation.

The first was the vulgar life which he led in the Roman Catholik
Religion, which seemed to bear no proportion with such an extraordinary
favour of God.

The second was his application to judicial Astrology, which is condemned
by many learned Men, and detested by those that pretend to ignorant
devotion.

The third was a suspition brought by his enemies, and many devout persons
in his time, that he was a Negromancer, and had familiarity with the
Angel of darkness.

The fourth was the obscurity of his Stanza’s, which was made worse by the
enormous faults of those that first Copied them, and by the carelesness
of the Printers.




CHAP. II.

How the first Objection hath caused the Author to be reputed a false
Prophet.


In consequence of the first Objection, calumny hath endeavoured to place
him among the false Prophets, because scarce any body can persuade
himself, that there being among the Faithful so many Illustrious persons
in Holiness and Learning, the Holy Ghost would have made choice of a
common person, and to reveal him so many rare secrets, concerning the
future Estate of his Church, and of those Kingdoms that acknowledge
her for their Mother, seeing that the Holy Scriptures shew us, that
the knowledge of future things (chiefly if it be extraordinary in its
extent) is a special Priviledge wherewith God honoureth his most faithful
Servants.

And to say truth, when the Holy Fathers and the Interpreters of the
Scripture speak of the Prerogatives of the Apostle St. John, they make
the chiefest to be that by which being full of Prophetical Spirit, he
foretold the future Estate of the Church; and in the Old Testament, so
many Prophets were so many Miracles and Prodigies of Holiness, and the
only name of Prophet in the Scripture is the most glorious Title that is
given to those that were Gods most faithful Servants.

If we find in the Scripture that Balaam hath Prophesied notwithstanding
his perfidiousness, and that the High Priest Caiaphas, notwithstanding
his wicked design of murdering Christ, hath also Prophesied; it was only
for a few things, and in such cases where God would singularly shew forth
his Glory, by those that would have smothered it.

How can we then believe the same of Nostradamus, who had not so much as
an extraordinary atom of Christian piety, by which he might have been so
much priviledg’d of God, as to know by his Divine Light the future Estate
of the Church, her Persecutions and her Victories from the year 1555. to
the end of the World.

Can it be possible that a Physician, an Astrologer, and one of the common
sort of people should have been chosen of God among so many thousands his
betters, to impart unto him those Graces, which have been the reward of
the purity and holiness of his Apostles, and of the faithfulness of St.
John the Evangelist.

This seemeth altogether improbable to Christian piety.




CHAP. III.

The second Objection hath ranked the Author among Dreamers and false
Visionaries.


Some are more moderate in the censuring of this Author, and being
unwilling to call him maliciously a false Prophet, would have him to be a
foolish Dreamer, who believed his own imaginations, and took pleasure in
his own fancies, whence came that Latine Distick of the Poet Jodelle,

    ~Nostra damus~ cum falsa damus, nam fallere nostrum est,
    Et cum falsa damus, nil nisi ~Nostra damus~.

This Distick was so pleasing to the Wits of the times, that without
further inquiry, since that time Nostradamus went for a Dreamer and a
doting fool.

This opinion increased more and more by his making of many Almanacks,
wherein every body may see how much he was taken with judicial Astrology;
and we see often in his Stanza’s the decision of the times, by the
conjunction of the Planets with the Signs, and by the Eclipses, whence
sometimes he doth infer some events that were to happen.

But what did undo him most, was the covetousness of the Printers and
Booksellers of his time, who seeing his Almanacks so well received, did
set forth a thousand others under his name, that were full of lies and
fopperies.

From that time the Author went for one of those poor Astrologers, who
get their living by foretelling absurdities; and pretend to read in the
Heavens, that which is only in their foolish imagination.




CHAP. IV.

The third Objection accuseth the Author of medling with the black Art,
of being a Negromancer, and a Disciple of the Devil.


If the precedents have been moderate in their censure; others have been
more severe in delivering their opinion, accusing him to have kept
acquaintance with the Devil, as the Negromancers and other Prestigiators
of the ancient times did.

The reason that made them think so is, that seeing so many things come
to pass, just as the Author had foretold; they could not attribute it
to the knowledge of judicial Astrology, nor to Divine Revelation, and
consequently concluded, that it must of necessity come from Satan.

They could not attribute it to judicial Astrology, either because they
had no opinion of it, or that the greatest defensors of that Astrology
do agree among themselves, that it cannot reach so far as to foretell a
thousand peculiar circumstances, which depend purely from the freedom
of Men, such as proper names are, and the like, which nevertheless our
Author did foretell.

They could neither attribute it to Divine Revelation, for the reasons
alledged in the first objection; moreover, because he was accused of a
thousand falsities and fopperies, Printed in those Almanacks that went
falsly under his name, whence they concluded that it could not come by
Divine Revelation, seeing that the Holy Ghost is the Spirit of Truth.

It followeth then (say they) that it must come from the Devil, by
the help of the Black Art; the Lord Florimond de Raimond a very
considerable Author, was of that opinion in his Book of the Birth of
Heresies, Chap. 3.




CHAP. V.

The fourth Objection maketh him the Head of those Seductors and
Impostors, which are dangerous in a Common-wealth.


As Fame doth increase by continuation of time, so doth calumny increase
by the multiplicity of opinions, she was not contented to deflour
slightly the Authors reputation, by making him pass for some sottish
Dreamer, and to rank him amongst the false Prophets, by accusing him
to meddle with the black Art, but must needs also sacrifice him to the
infernal Furies, by making him the Prince of Seductors and Impostors,
that ought to be banished out of every Common-wealth. The fondamental
reason of this was the obscurity of his Stanza’s, where there was neither
rime nor reason; the obscurity did proceed of abundance of gross faults,
which the Copisters and Printers have inserted in them, from the omission
of several words, from the changing and altering of others, and from the
addition of some others, which did destroy the sense.

From this great obscurity, calumny draweth this argument, to ruine
utterly the Author, charging him to be all at once a false Prophet, a
dotish Dreamer, a Magician, and an infamous Seductor of people.

If God had inspired him what he hath written, he would have done it for
the good of his Church and true Believers, seeing he never granteth this
Prophetical Grace to any, but to that end as it appeareth in the Holy
Scriptures.

This being so, what profit can any body draw from him, if the sense of
his Stanza’s be so obscure, as not to be understood? and although it
should be granted, that some accidents that have happened in Christendom,
may sometimes be found in his Prophecies, what fruit hath the Church
reaped of it, seeing that those accidents that were foretold, were never
known, till they had come to pass, and that there was no avoiding of them?

It cannot therefore be believed, that God should have been the Author of
his Predictions, but rather the Subtle Spirit of Satan, with whom he was
acquainted by such like black Arts.

According to those four Objections, the Lord Sponde in the third Volume
of his Annals, made him this Epitaph in the year 1566. Mortuus est hoc
anno nugax ille toto orbe famosus ~Michael Nostradamus~, qui se præscium
& præsagum eventuum futurorum per astrorum influxum venditavit, sub cujus
deinceps nomine quivis homines ingeniosi suas hujusmodi cogitationes
protendere consueveruent, in quem valde apposite lusit qui dixit.
~Nostra damus~ cum falsa damus, &c. In English. In the year 1566. died
that Trifler so famous through all the World, Michael Nostradamus
who boasted while he lived, to know and foretell future things, by the
knowledge he had of the influences of the Planets, under whose name
afterwards many ingenious Men have vented their Imaginations, insomuch,
that he that made that Distick, Nostra damus cum falsa damus, &c.
seemeth to have very well said.




CHAP. VI.

Proofs setting forth evidently that ~Nostradamus~ was enlightned by the
Holy Ghost.


In consequence of these objections forged by calumny, Nostradamus name
hath been so cried down, that I have thought me self oblidged to make
his Apology, to give the greater credit to his Prophecy, the exposition
of which I do here undertake, and to proove, that effectually he was
enlightned by the Holy Ghost: first, by writting the History of his Life,
as I have done in the beginning of this Book; Secondly, by answering to
all the said Objections; Thirdly, by alledging the Elogies given him by
several Grave and Authentical Authors.

First, I maintain that he was enlightned by the Holy Ghost, by an
unanswerable reason, drawn out the Theology, but before we discourse of
it, let us suppose that Nostradamus hath foretold many things, which
absolutely depends from the free will of men, and cannot be known,
neither by judicial Astrology, nor by Satan himself, such are for exemple
the proper names of Persons, which nevertheless he doth in his Prophecies.

He nameth the Lord of Monluc, the Sprightful Gascon, the Captain
Charry, his Camerade, the Lord de la Mole, Admiral of Henry the
II. Galleys, Entragues, who was beheaded by order of Lewis the XIII.
the Headsman of the Duke of Montmorency, named Clerepegne; the Bassa
Sinan, destroyer of Hungary; the Murderer of Henry the III. named
Clement; the Attorney David, the Captain Ampus; the Mayor of the
City of Puy in Gelay, named Rousseau, under Henry the IV. Lewis
Prince of Condé, under Francis II. Sixtus V. calling him the Son
of Hamont; Gabrielle d’Estrée; the Lord Mutonis sent to Paris by
those of Aix, under Charles the IX. the Lord Chancellor of France,
named Antony de Sourdis; the Queen Leuise: Antony of Portugal:
the Governour of Cazal under Henry II.

Secondly, The number of things is of the same nature: Nostradamus doth
often calculate it; he reckoneth fourteen Confederates for the service of
Henry IV. in the City of Puy: ten great Ships prosecuting extreamly
the Admiral in the Battle of Lepanto: five Ships taken from the
Spaniard by those of Diepe, under Henry II. nine hundred thousands
Mores that went out of Spain under Henry IV. three hundred and
fifty thousands killed under Charles IX. and Henry III. three saved
at the taking of a Town in Hungary by the Turks: nine separated from
the company of Seditious, that were to be put to death, three Princes
of Turky Massacred, and the fourth being the youngest saved; thirty
Conspirators upon London Bridge, against the Majesty of King Charles
I. and such like.

Thirdly, We find in these Prophecies, the Prodigies that have no other
causes in nature, then the meer will of God; such as Comets are, the
casting of monstrous Fishes by the Sea upon the Land, the Armies in the
Air, the speaking of Dogs, the birth of Monsters, and such like.

Fourthly, We find in those Prophecies those actions that are purely
indifferent; for example, that the King of England did appear upon a
Scaffold without his Doublet; that in the place where he was beheaded,
another man had been killed three days before; that Libertat went a
Hunting with a Greyhond, and a Blood-hond; that the two little Royals
were conducted to St. Germain, rather then to any other place, and such
like.

Fifthly, We find the Birth of several particular persons that were born
after his death.

Sixthly, The Governments of Places given by the free will of Kings to
such and such.

All these things cannot be known by judicial Astrology, seeing that in
Heaven there is neither Names, nor Numbers, nor extraordinary Prodigies:
seeing also that judicial Astrology presupposeth the Birth of persons,
that one may foretel their future actions; the same things are also
unknown to Satan, for the Angelical species know nothing of individual
things, but under the notion of possible, and not of future.

Whence I conclude with this irrefragable Argument, that the Author hath
known many several things that are not written in the Heavenly Book, nor
represented to him by Angelical Species, therefore he hath known them
from God himself.

The Author himself in his Epistle to his Son Cæsar Nostradamus
confesseth, that he hath foretold many things by Divine Virtue and
Inspiration.

And a little after he saith, that the knowledge of those things, which
meerly depends from free will, cannot be had either by humane auguries,
nor by any other humane knowledge, nor by any secret virtue that
belongeth to sublunary things, but only by a Light, belonging to the
Order of Eternity.

This is not a small Argument, to confirm what we have said, and to
prove that the Author hath evidently been conscious, that his knowledge
came from Heaven, and that Gods goodness did him that grace; for having
rejected and abhorred other means, that Impostors make use of for
foretelling something.

He writteth all these things of himself: First, in his Liminary Epistle
to his Son Cæsar, he conjureth him, that when he should go about to
study the foretelling of future things by Astrology, to avoid all kind of
Magick, prohibited by the Holy Scripture, and the Canons of the Church;
and to encourage him the more to it, he relateth what happened to him,
viz. that having been Divinely enlightned, and fully persuaded that God
only can give the knowledge of future things, which absolutely depends
of the free will of men, he did burn abundance of Writings, wherein was
taught the Art of Prophecying, and as they were a burning, there came
out a great flame, which was like (he thought) to burn his House all to
ashes, by which accident he understood the falsity of such Writings,
and that the Devil was vexed to see his plots discovered; besides that,
he confesseth that being the greatest Sinner of the World, nevertheless
he got that favour from Heaven by a Divine Inspiration; and because no
body should doubt of it, he learnedly expoundeth wherein consisteth that
inspired Revelation, he saith that it is, A participation of the Eternal
Divinity, by which we come to judge of what the Holy Ghost imparteth to
us; by that participation of Eternity, the Author doth not understand a
communication of the continuance of the Divine being, but a participation
of the Divine knowledge, measured by its Eternity, as the Schools terms
it.

Effectively, the Author compareth this participation to a glistering
flame, which createth a new day in our understanding, which flame
proceeding from Gods infinite knowledge, who seeth and comprehendeth
what is Eternity, doth impart unto us what is inclosed in the volubility
of the Heavens.

After this testimony, which wholly destroyeth the Sinister opinions that
men had of his Prophecies, he sheweth how Judicial Astrology may agree
with the knowledge of that which proceedeth from a Prophetical Spirit.

It is true, saith he, that sometimes God imparteth this Light not only
to the unlearned, and to his Holy Prophets, but also to those that
are versed in Judicial Astrology, making that instrumental for the
confirmation of his inspired truths: As we see that natural Sciences,
help the light of the Faith, and make a certain disposition in the mind
fitter then ordinary, to receive those Divine impressions.

Thus (saith he) in the beginning of the Epistle, God did supernaturaly
inspire me, not by any Bacchick fury, nor by Lymphatical motions, as he
did the Sybilles; but by Astronomical assertions; that is to say, that
God gave him that grace, not by any Extasy, but by studying those rules,
which Astrology teacheth.

The same things he saith again a little after in this manner: the
Astrologer being in his Study, and consulting the Astronomical Rules upon
the motions of the Heavens, the Conjunction and several Aspects of the
Planets, he guesseth at some future events, of which being not certain,
this Divine Light riseth in his mind, and imparteth clearly to him what
he knew before, only Ænigmatically and obscurely, and in the shade of
that natural light.

Sometimes also (saith he) this Light cometh the first into the
Astrologers mind, and he afterwards comparing the thing revealed unto him
with the Astronomical rules, he seeth that they do wholly agree together;
and this is the method that he hath made use of, to know whether the
inspired truths were agreeing with the Astronomical Calculations; a
method that he hath made use of some times, but not always, for he hath
foretold many things, which he could not read in the Heavens.

By these testimonies of the Author himself, every one may see how he
made use of Judicial Astrology, and wherefore he studied it so much; how
far his knowledge did extend; the glory he giveth to God alone, for his
Prophetical knowledge; what horrour he hath always had against unlawful
means to attain unto it; how much he did value that Grace, considering
his unworthiness; and the manner how the Lord was pleased to gratifie him.




CHAP. VII.

Answer to the first Objection against ~Nostradamus~, which pretendeth to
rank him among the false Prophets.


Let us see now what calumny pretendeth for the obscuring this Prophet
of our days; the knowledge of future things (saith she) is a priviledge
belonging to the Saints, and to those whom God hath endowed with an
eminent vertue. I acknowledge, it is so commonly, and in the ordinary
way of Grace, but if God be pleased to impart that priviledge to those
that have not attained to that Degree of Holiness, and that it really
appeareth by the reasons of Theologie, that they have been gratified
with it, we are bound to admire his Royal bounty, which giveth when, and
to whom he pleaseth: for example, no body deserveth to be a Marshal of
France, but he that hath been in several Battles, and at the taking
of many Towns; but if the King be pleased to honour with that Dignity a
Gentleman that never Warred but against the Deer, the Kings goodness is
to be praised, which extendeth even to those that have not deserved it;
it is the same reason here, it is visibly apparent that Nostradamus
hath been enlightned by the Holy Ghost, and yet he hath not imitated
the lifes of those great Saints of the Church: what can be inferred from
thence, but that it was Gods pleasure to extend his bounty upon his
poor Creatures, which is easie to be granted in this point, because the
gift of Prophecy is not a sanctifying Grace, but a supernatural gift,
of which a sinner is capable of, as we see in Balaam, Caiaphas,
and the Sybilles, and much more in a Christian, who observeth Gods
Commandments, and endeavoureth to keep himself in his Grace.

But (saith calumny) Christian piety seemeth to be repugnant to this
Divine disposition, seeing that in Nostradamus time, there were
thousands in the Church of God that were capable of this favour, and to
prefer to them a Physitian, an Astrologer, and an Almanack-maker, is a
thing that the Wits cannot apprehend so well, as to frame a good opinion
for this Author.

Hold there Reader, do not enter into the Sanctuary of Gods secret
Judgements, you should loose you self, and never find the way out: how
many such questions might I ask you? why did God in former times chuse
the Family and person of David, and preferred it to so many others of the
Children of Israel? why did Christ raise Judas to the dignity of an
Apostle, preferring him before Nathaniel, and so many others that lived
Holily.

Bring therefore no more such questions, but say with the Scripture, As
it pleased the Lord, so it was done: I will nevertheless give you some
satisfaction in that point. There was two things in the Author which
might have procured that blessing from God.

The first is, that having in his possession those writtings which
promised the knowledge of future things, to which he was much inclined,
he slighted and burnt them, being persuaded that God alone was the Author
of this Grace; I do esteem that action very Heroical in its circumstance,
because being inticed by a vehement curiosity to know future things, and
having in his hand the means that opened the way to it, he did Sacrifice
them to God, for which perhaps God was willing to gratifie him with this
favour.

The second thing that was in Nostradamus is, that he had naturally a
Genius for the knowing of future things, as himself confesseth in two
Epistles to King Henry the II. and to Cæsar his own Son, and besides
that Genius, the knowledge of Astrology, did smooth him the way to
discover many future events. Having those two things, he had a greater
disposition then others to receive those Supernatural Lights; and as God
is pleased to work sweetly in his Creatures, and to give some forerunning
dispositions to those Graces he intendeth to bestow, it seemeth that to
that purpose he did chuse our Author to reveal him so many wonderful
secrets.

We see every day that God in the distributing of his Graces carrieth
himself towards us, according to our humours and natural inclinations,
he employeth those that have a generous and Martial heart for the
defence of his Church, and the destruction of Tyrants; he leadeth those
of a melancholick humour into Colledges and Cloisters, and cherisheth
tenderly, those that are of meek and mild disposition; even so, seeing
Nostradamus inclined to this kind of knowledge, he gave him in a great
measure the grace of it.




CHAP. VIII.

Answer to the second Objection, which would have him pass for a Doctor.


We shall not have much to say to these more moderate persons, seeing
that we have already given the reason of it, viz. the covetousness of
the Booksellers and Printers, who made use of the Authors name, for the
better sale of their false Almanacks, therefore if Jodelle the Poet
grounded upon this opinion, made that Satyrical Distick.

    ~Nostra damus~ cum falsa damus, nam fallere nostrum est,
      Et cum falsa damus, nil nisi ~Nostra damus~.

We answer him,

    ~Nostra damus~ cum verba damus quæ ~Nostradamus~ dat,
      Nam quæcunque dedit nil nisi vera dedit.

Or thus

    ~Vera damus~ cum verba damus quæ ~Nostradamus~ dat,
      Sed cum ~Nostra damus~, nil nisi falsa damus.




CHAP. IX.

Answer to the third Objection, which accuseth him of the Black Art, and
of Negromancy.


The more doth Calumny lift up her self against this great man, the weaker
are her arguments, like the smoke which is so much the easier dissipated,
as it ascendeth higher.

Her reason is impertinent in this distributive argument, he hath known
those things (saith she) which he could not know by the Planets, and he
had them not from God, therefore he had them from Satan.

And we answer this argument in the same way, he hath known those things
which he could not know by the Planets, nor by Satan, therefore he had
them from God; this Argument is concluding, but that of calumny halteth,
for it ought to have proved that he had not his knowledge from God, and
that all those things he hath known may be known to Satan, which two
things we have manifestly proved to be false, therefore if the Lord
Florimond de Raimond was alive, I believe he would correct what he hath
written against him.




CHAP. X.

Answer to the fourth Objection, of Calumny, which brandeth our Author
with the title of Chief of the Seductors and Impostors.


The Weapons of this Medusa are sharper in this point then in others,
therefore our Buckler accordingly must be of the best mettle and temper.

We cannot deny but Nostradamus hath affected obscurity, himself
acknowledgeth it in his two Epistles, in that to Cæsar his son, he
saith, he hath done it, not only because of the times wherein he lived,
but also by reason of those that were to follow, in the times wherein he
lived the Case was as it is now, Veritas odium parit, and this hatred
in powerful men is prejudicial to those that speak the Truth, he was also
cautious in that, by reason of the times following; for if he had plainly
declared what he meant, the Wits would have laughed at it, and would not
have believed those strange revolutions that came to pass, and which our
Author had foretold. In his Epistle to Henry the II he telleth him,
that he doth purposely make use of obscure terms to express his mind, for
the reasons before alledged.

Now Calumny saith, that this affectation of obscurity is a sign that
God was not the Author of his Knowledge, seeing that by this obscurity
they have proved unprofitable to the Church.

I answer first, that the consequence is false; for the Holy Prophets have
spoken so obscurely, that a great part of what they had Prophecied was
not known till after it had come to pass.

I answer secondly, that although Prophecies were not understood till
after the fulfilling thereof, it doth not follow that they were
unprofitable; because by their fulfilling in due time, we gather, that
he who revealed them was the true God, Lord of times and Eternity, and
therefore being the God of Israel, and of the Christians, he ought to
be worshiped. By this principle Cyrus and Alexander knew the true
God, Cyrus by having seen the Prophecies of Isaiah, and Alexander
those of Daniel.

Therefore as the Prophecies of the Saints have not been fruitless, though
not understood till they were fulfilled, even so we must not infer that
Nostradamus’s Prophecies have been useless, though they have remained
in obscurity so long a while.

Besides, there is no doubt but Nostradamus having Prophecied so many
several things that are come to pass, but that hereafter when the
Heathen shall see it they shall glorifie God, and shall acknowledge a
true Religion, as did Cyrus, who many Authors believe to have obtained
Salvation.

I answer in the third place, that God permitteth ordinarily that
Prophecies lie long in the dark, and then raiseth the Spirit of some men
to expound them, as he did that of Daniel to interpret the 70 Weeks of
the Babylonian Captivity, Prophecied by Jeremiah, to incourage the
faithful three ways.

First, in shewing them, that if the first Prophecies have been punctually
fulfilled, the rest will likewise come to pass, seeing the same God hath
dictated them.

Secondly, in unfolding to them the future wonders, of which they shall be
partakers.

Thirdly, in giving warning how they may attain to them, and shew those
accidents that might be an hindrance. Thus God did permit, that for the
space of 100. years Nostradamus Prophecies should lie in darkness, and
be contemned, but after that time God will raise some body to interpret
them, whence the faithful seeing so many things foretold come to pass so
exactly, will incourage one another by seing so many wonderful prodigies,
of whom they shall be Eye Witnesses.

As for my part I have undertaken this Work, only to authorise the wonders
that shall be seen in our days, and to invite the Christian Princes to
the same design.

The conclusion of this discourse is, that our Medusa Calumny, must
needs retreat in her dens, and that we ought to forgive those Authors
that have spoken so ill of our Author, seing they wanted the Intelligence
of his Prophecies, and that the Church did suspend the authorising of
them.




CHAP. XI.

Some difficulties against what we have said, drawn out of ~Nostradamus~
his own Epistles.


We have (thanks be to God) sheltered this famous man from the back-biting
of Calumny, but that we may clear wholly the Heaven of this reputation,
we add this Chapter more for the clearing of some words that are in
his Epistles, which seem to contradict some of those things we have
said; the Author in his Epistles to his Son Cæsar, after he had said
that God had disposed him to receive thy impression of supernatural
lights, not by a Bacchant furor, nor by a Lymphatical motion, but by
Astronomical assertions, he saith in the same Epistle towards the end;
That sometimes in the Week being surprised by a Lymphatick humor, and
making his Nocturnal Studies sweet by his calculations, he made Books of
Prophecies, each one containing a hundred Astronomical Stanza’s, which he
endeavoured to set out something obscurely, from which words it might be
gathered, that he made his Prophecies by a Lymphatical Spirit, and by the
only judicial Astrology.

And in the Epistle to King Henry the II. he seemeth to confess,
that his Prophecie is nothing but a natural Genius, which he had by
Inheritance from his Ancestors.

To these difficulties I answer, supposing first that anciently those were
called Lymphaticks, who were mad for Love; because the first that was
observed among the Ancients to be mad with that passion, threw himself
into the water, which in Latine is called Lympha, whence all those that
were afterwards transported with the excess of any passion, either of
Love, Melancholy, Choler or Envy, have been called Lymphaticks.

So that in this place a Lymphatical motion is nothing properly but a deep
Melancholy, which separating us from all Earthly things, doth transport
the mind to extraordinary thoughts either good or bad.

This being suposed, I say that the Author confesseth, that his retreat,
solitariness, nocturnal Watchings, and Melancholy, have disposed him
much to the receiving of that Heavenly flame, which is the cause of
Vaticination and Prophecie.

And because he did often spend the whole nights in this study, this
Nocturnal retreat caused in him a retirement from all worldly things,
at which time he felt a Divine elevating Virtue, that raised his
understanding to those Divine Knowledges.

And because this elevating Vertue was caused in him by Divine operation,
he doth attribute always his Prophecies to God alone; and by reason that
this elevation hath some resemblance with that of the Lymphaticks, he
saith, that sometimes he did Lymphatise not properly speaking, but by
resemblance.

So that it is true, our Author did not receive his Prophecies by
Lymphatical motion, or Bacchant furie, but from God himself, who did
work in him while he observed his Astronomical assertions; and it is
also true, that he felt this Divine operation by a kind of a Lymphatical
motion.

Concerning what he saith to Henry the II. it is certain he maketh use
of that Language as much by a motive of Truth to conceal that Grace which
he had received from God, as of Humility.

By a Motive of Truth, because effectually; because all the
Nostradamus’s had some tincture of Prophecie, and his Son the Capucin
acknowledgeth it himself.

By a Motive of Humility; because acknowledging himself to be a miserable
sinner, and seeing that this gift of Prophecie was not ordinarily granted
but unto Saints. He chuseth rather to attribute his Prophecies to his
Genius, than otherways to procure a Fame and Authority to his predictions.

In confirmation of what we have said, That he was often in that
transport, many years before his death he made the Stanza of the
Century, in which is contained all the great Works of the Philosophers,
and foretelleth, that a great Divine shall attain to the perfection of
that great Work, which Divine is called, the Divine Verbe, turning
into French the Word θεολογος, which signifieth Divine Word or Verb.
Nevertheless he never wrought himself at that Work, but got his living
Honourably by his practise of Physick, by which we may see, that he did
write some things which himself understood not, unless they were such
general ones, as might be read in the Heavens.




CHAP. XII.

Elogies given to ~Nostradamus~ by several Authentical Authors.


If several Authors either by envy or ignorance have defamed our Author,
others of no shall repute have taken his defence in hand.

D’Aurat one of the most excellent Poets of France, living at the
same time as Nostradamus, made a few explications of his Prophecies,
which as the report goes, did please the Readers. I am sorry I could not
get them, it would have been some ease to me; for it is easier to add
than to invent. The first Volume of the Lord la Croix du Main, maketh
honourable mention of him, the same saith, that his Motto was Felix
Oviam prior Ætas, Happy the first Age that was contented with their
Flock, shewing by that, what esteem he had of frugality and sincerity
of manners, and what aversion he had against the Vices of his Age,
the unruliness of manners, and cousenage of men. Ronsard the Prince
of the French Poets singeth his praises: The Lord Boucher in that
great Volume, intitled the Mistical Crown, in favour of the future
Croisade, doth vindicate our Author from Calumny, and expoundeth some
of his Prophecies pretty happily.

I will not relate here what his Son Cæsar Nostradamus writeth modestly
of him in his History of Provence, under Lewis the XII. Henry the
II. and Charles the IX. his Evidence may be suspected, because of the
Consanguinity.

One of the greatest Wits of this last Age, who desireth to be nameless,
giveth him this Character.

First, That God Almighty hath chosen Michael Nostradamus among the
common sort of Christians, to impart unto him the knowledge of many
prodigious and extraordinary future things.

Secondly, He maintaineth, that after the Apostles and Canonical
Prophets, he is the first of all in three things, in his certainty and
infallibility, in the generality and in the quantity. As to the first,
he doth not doubt but the Abbot Joachim ought to give him place; for
though he hath foretold some things that have come to pass, he hath
written a hundred others which are meer fopperies.

Thirdly, He maintaineth that the Emperour Leo in his prophetical Tables
is far below him; for he doth only aim at those things which regard the
Eastern Empire, as Theophrastus Paracelsus hath done for the Western.

Concerning the quantity of things, he maintaineth, that none of the
others can dispute it with him; for Nostradamus hath made above a
thousand stanza’s (if we had them all) each of which containeth two or
three prophetical Truths, some of which regard the East, others the West,
others some private Kingdoms and States others private and particular
things, and all with Truth and certainty.




CHAP. XIII.

What these Stanza’s Prophecie of.


The Author in his Epistle to King Henry the II. saith, that he treateth
of things which were to happen in many Cities and Towns of Europe, and
of a part of Asia and Africa.

And to say Truth, I have found nothing in them concerning the East or
West, Jappan or China.

He treateth chiefly of France as of his Native Kingdom, and of his own
Countrey Provence, and that which is next to it, viz. Piemont.

He speaketh amply of the Popes, and of Italy, Turky and England:
As for the Empire Spain, and Suedeland, he doth moderately speak
of them. Concerning Æthiopia and Africa there is some nine or ten
Stanza’s.

In all those places he foretelleth many things, not only general for
every State, but also particular and individual for several persons. He
also foretelleth many supernatural prodigies in the Heavens, the Air, the
Sea, and the Land.

He hath inserted among his Prophecies four Horoscopes, the first of the
Grandfather of the Lord l’Ainier in the Province of Anjou; the second
of one called Urnel Vausile; the third of one Cosme du Jardin; and
the fourth of one, whom he nameth not, but describeth him by his stature.




CHAP. XIV.

Since what time these Prophecies began.


It is certain that they began in January 1555. because he dedicated
the first seven Centuries to his Son Cæsar the first day of March in
the said year, and consequently they were made before that time, and we
cannot allow less than two Months to an Author for the making of 700.
Stanza’s: Nevertheless for a greater manifestation of his prophetical
Spirit, I have not found any of his Prophecies that did come to pass
before the first of March 1555.

As for the Eight, Ninth and Ten Century, there is reason to believe, that
the effect of them doth not begin before the 27 June 1558. which is the
date of his Liminary Epistle to Henry the II. Nevertheless he saith
in the same Epistle, that in a writing by it self he will set down the
exposition of his Prophecies, beginning the 14 of March 1557. and in
the Epistle to Nostradamus his Son, he saith in general that he hath
composed Books of Prophecies, each one containing one hundred Stanza’s,
without specifying whether he spoke of the seven that he dedicated to
him, or of all the others.

As for my part, I believe he had made them all in the year 1555. but
that he had not yet examined the three last Centuries, according to the
Calculation of his Astronomical assertions, as he seemeth to indicate
often in his Epistle to Henry II. and to say the truth, I have found
some Stanza’s, which were fulfilled before the year 1558. though very few.

As for the extent of his Prophecies, it is certain, that it is to the end
of the World, as I shall make it appear in the explication of the 48, the
49, and 56. Stanza’s of the first Century, and the 72, 73, and 94. of the
tenth, and all according to the Holy Scripture.

All these things being premised, we shall proceed to the explication of
the Prophecies, setting first the Authors Luminary Epistle to his Son.




THE

PREFACE

TO Mr.

Michael Nostradamus

HIS

PROPHECIES,

Ad ~Cæsarem Nostradamum~ Filium vita & Felicitas.


Thy late coming, Cæsar Nostradamus, my son, hath caused me to bestow
a great deal of time in continual and nocturnal watchings, that I might
leave a Memorial of me after my death, to the common benefit of Mankind,
concerning the things which the Divine Essence hath revealed to me by
Astronomical Revolutions; and since it hath pleased the immortal God,
that thou are come late into this World, and canst not say that thy years
that are but few, but thy Months are incapable to receive into thy weak
understanding, what I am forced to define of futurity, since it is not
possible to leave thee in Writing, what might be obliterated by the
injury of times, for the Hereditary word of occult prædictions shall
be lockt up in my brest, considering also that the events are definitely
uncertain, and that all is governed by the power of God, who inspired
us not by a Bacchant fury or Lymphatick motion, but by Astronomical
affections. Soli numine Divino afflati præsagiunt & Spiritu Prophetico
particularia: Although I have often foretold long before what hath
afterwards come to pass, and in particular Regions, acknowledging all to
have been done by Divine Vertue and Inspiration, being willing to hold my
peace by reason of the injury, not onely of the present time, but also
of the future, and to put them in Writing, because the Kingdoms, Sects,
and Regions shall be so Diametrically opposed, that if I should relate
what shall happen hereafter, those of the present Reign, Sect, Religion
and Faith, would find it so disagreeing with their fances, that they
would condemn that which future Ages shall find and know to be true;
considering also the saying of our Saviour, Nolite Sanctum dare canibus
ne conculcent pedibus & conversi discumpant vos, which hath been the
cause that I have withdrawn my tongue from the Vulgar, and my Pen from
Paper. But afterwards I was willing for the common good to enlarge my
self in dark and abstruse Sentences, declaring the future Events, chiefly
the most urgent, and those which I foresaw (what ever humane mutation
happened) would not offend the hearers, all under dark figures more then
Prophetical, for although, Abscondisti hæc a sapientibus & prudensibus,
i. e. potentibus & Regibus enucleasti ea exiguis & tennibus, and
the Prophets by means onely of the immortal God and good Angels, have
received the Spirit of Vaticination, by which they foresee things, and
foretel future events; for nothing is perfect without him, whose power
and goodness is so great to his Creatures, that though they are but men,
nevertheless by the likeness of our good Genius to the Angels, this heat
and Prophetical power draws near us, as it happens by the Beams of the
Sun, which cast their influence both on Elementary and not Elementary
bodies; as for us who are men, we cannot attain any thing by our natural
knowledge, of the secrets of God our Creator. Quia non est nostrum nosse
tempora nec momenta, &c.

Besides, although there is, or may come some persons, to whom God
Almighty will reveal by impressions made on his understanding some
secrets of the future, according to the Judicial Astrology, as it hath
happened in former times, that a certain power and voluntary faculty
possessed them as a flame of fire, so that by his inspiration, they
were able to judge of Divine and Humane things: for the Divine works
that are absolutely necessary, God will end. But my son, I speak to
thee too obscurely; but as for the secrets that are received by the
subtle Spirit of fire, by which the understanding being moved, doth
contemplate the highest Celestial Bodies, as being active and vigilant
to the very pronunciation without fear, or any shameful loquacity: all
which proceeded from the Divine Power of the Eternal God, from whom
all goodness floweth. Now my son, although I have inserted the name of
Prophet here, I will not attribute to my self so sublime a Title, for
qui Propheta dicitur hodie olim vocabatur videns, and Prophets are
those properly (my Son) that see things remote from the natural knowledge
of Men; but put the case, the Prophets by the means of the perfect light
of Prophecy, may see as well Divine things as Humane, (which cannot be
seeing the effects of future predictions) do extend a great way, for the
secrets of God are incomprehensible, and the efficient power moveth afar
off the natural knowledge, taking their beginning at the free will, cause
those things to appear, which otherwise could not be known, neither by
humane auguries, or any hidden knowledge or secret virtue under Heaven,
but only by the means of some indivisible Eternal being, or Comitial
and Herculean agitation, the causes come to be known by the Cœlestial
motion. I say not therefore my Son, that you may not understand me well,
because the knowledge of this matter cannot yet be imprinted in thy weak
brain, but that future causes afar off are subject to the knowledge of
humane Creatures, if (notwithstanding the Creature) things present and
future were neither obscure nor hidden from the intellectual seal; but
the perfect knowledge of the cause of things, cannot be acquired without
the Divine Inspiration, seeing that all Prophetical Inspiration received,
hath its original principle from God the Creator, next, from good Luck,
and afterwards from Nature, therefore cases indifferently produced or
not produced, the Prophecy partly happens where it hath been foretold,
for the understanding being intellectually created, cannot see occult
things, unless it be by the voice coming from the Lymbo, by the means
of the thin flame, to which the knowledge of future causes is inclined;
and also my Son I intreat thee not to bestow thy understanding on such
fopperies, which drie up the Body and damn the Soul, bringing vexation
to the Senses; chiefly abhor the vanity of the execrable Magick,
forbidden by the Sacred Scriptures, and by the Canons of the Church; in
the first of which is excepted Judicial Astrology, by which, and by the
means of Divine Inspiration, with continual supputations, we have put
in writting our Prophecies. And although this occult Philosophy was not
forbidden, I could never be persuaded to meddle with it, although many
Volums concerning that Art, which hath been concealed a great while,
were presented to me; but fearing what might happen, after I had read
them, I presented them to Vulcan, who while he was a devouring them,
the flame mixing with the Air, made an unwonted light more bright then
the usual flame, and as if it had been a Lightning, shining all the
house over, as if it had been all in a flame; therefore that henceforth
you might not be abused in the search of the perfect Transformation, as
much selene as solar, and to seek in the waters uncorruptible mettal; I
have burnt them all to ashes, but as to the judgement which cometh to be
perfected by the help of the Cœlestial Judgement, I will manifest to you,
that you may have knowledge of future things, rejecting the fantastical
imaginations that should happen by the limiting the particularity of
Places; by Divine inspiration, supernatural, according to the Cœlestial
figures, the places, and a part of the time, by an occult, property, and
by a Divine virtue, power and faculty, in the presence of which the three
times are comprehended by Eternity, revolution being tyed to the cause
that is past, present, and future, Quia omnia sunt Nuda & aperta, &c.
therefore my Son, thou mayst notwithstanding thy tender brain comprehend
things that shall happen hereafter, and may be foretold by cœlestial
natural lights, and by the Spirit of Prophecy; not that I will attribute
to my self the name of a Prophet, but as a mortal man, being no farther
from Heaven by my sence, then I am from Earth by my Feet, possum errare,
falli, decipi; I am the greatest Sinner of the World, subject to all
humane afflictions, but being supprised sometimes in the week by a
Prophetical humour, and by a long Calculation, pleasing my self in my
Study, I have made Books of Prophecies, each one containing a hundred
Astronomical Stanza’s, which I have joyned obscurely, and are perpetual
Vaticinations from this year to the year 3797. at which some perhaps
will frown, seeing so large an extention of time, and that I treat of
every thing under the Moon, if thou livest the natural Age of a Man, thou
shalt see in thy Climat, and under the Heaven of thy Nativity the future
things that have been foretold, although God only is he who knoweth the
Eternity of his Light, proceeding from himself; and I say freely to
those to whom his incomprehensible greatness hath by a long melancholick
inspiration revealed, that by the means of this occult cause Divinely
manifested, chiefly by two principal causes, which are comprehended in
the understanding of him that is Inspired and Prophecyeth, one is that
he cleareth the supernatural Light in the person that foretelleth by
the Doctrine of the Planets, and Prophecyeth by inspired Revelation,
which is a kind of participation of the Divine Eternity, by the means
of which the Prophet judgeth of what the Divine Spirit hath given him
by the means of God the Creatour, and by a natural instigation, viz.
that what is predicted is true, and hath taken its original from above,
and such light and small flame is of all efficacy and sublimity, no
less then the natural light makes the Philosophers so secure, that by
the means of the principles of the first cause, they have attained the
greatest depth of the profoundest science; but that I may not wander too
far (my Son) from the capacity of thy sense, as also, because I find
that Learning would be at a great loss, and that before the universal
Conflagration shall happen so many great Inundations, that there shall
scarce be any Land, that shall not be covered with water, and this shall
last so long, that except Ænographies and Topographies all shall
perish, also before and after these Inundations in many Countreys there
shall be such scarcety of rain, and such a deal of fire, and burning
stones shall fall from Heaven, that nothing unconsumed shall be left,
and this shall happen a little while before the great conflagration; for
although the Planet Mars makes an end of his course, and is come to the
end of his last Period, nevertheless he shall begin it again, but some
shall be gathered in Aquarius for many years, others in Cancer also
for many years, and now we are governed by the Moon, under the power of
Almighty God; which Moon before she hath finished her Circuit, the Sun
shall come, and then Saturn, for according to the Cœlestial Signs,
the Reign of Saturn shall come again, so that all being Calculated,
the World draws near to an Anaragonick revolution, and at this present
that I write this before 177. years, three Months, eleven Days, through
Pestilence, Famine, War, and for the most part Inundations, the World
between this and that prefixed time, before and after for several times
shall be so diminished, and the people shall be so few, that they shall
not find enough to Till the Ground, so that they shall remain fallow as
long as they have been Tilled; although we be in the seventh Millenary,
which ends all and brings us near the eighth, where the Firmament of the
eighth Sphere is, which in a Latitudinary dimention is the place where
the great God shall make an end of the revolution, where the Cœlestial
Bodies shall begin to move again. By that Superiour motion that maketh
the Earth firm and stable, non inclinabitur in seculum seculi, unless
his will be accomplished, and not otherwise; although by ambiguous
opinions exceeding all natural reasons by Mahometical Dreams, also
sometimes God the Creator by the Ministers of his Messengers of fire
and flame shows to our external senses, and chiefly to our eyes, the
causes of future Predictions, signifying the future Event, that he will
manifest to him that Prophecyeth for the Prophecy that is made by the
Internal Light, comes to judge of the thing, partly with and by the means
of External Light, for although the party which seemeth to have by the
eye of understanding, what it hath not by the Lœsion of its imaginative
sense, there is no reason why what he foretelleth should come by Divine
Inspiration, or by the means of an Angelical Spirit, inspired into the
Prophetick person, annointing him with vaticination, moving the fore part
of his fancy, by divers nocturnal apparitions, so that by Astronomical
administration, he Prophecyeth with a Divine certitude, joyned to the
Holy prediction of the future, having no other regard then to the
freedom of his mind. Come now my Son, and understand what I find by my
revolutions, which are agreeing with the Divine Inspiration, viz. that
the Swords draws near to us now, and the Plague and the War more horrid
then hath been seen in the Life of three Men before, as also by Famine,
which shall return often, for the Stars agree with the revolution, as
also he said visitabo in virgâ ferreà iniquitates eorum & in verberibus
percutiam eos, for the Mercies of God shall not be spread a while, my
Son, before most of my Prophecies shall come to pass; then oftentimes
shall happen sinister storms, (Conteram ergo ~(said the Lord)~ &
confringam & non miserebor) and a thousand other accidents that shall
happen by Waters and continual Rains, as I have more fully at large
declared in my other Prophecies, written in solutâ oratione, limiting
the places, times and prefixed terms, that men coming after, may see and
know that those accidents are certainly come to pass, as we have marked
in other places, speaking more clearly, although the explication be
involved in obscurity, sed quando submovenda erit ignorantia, the case
shall be made more clear; making an end here, my Son, accept of this Gift
of thy Father Michael Nostradamus, hoping to expound to thee every
Prophecy of these Stanza’s, praying to the Immortal God, that he would
grant thee a long Life in Felicity.

                 From ~Salon~ this 1. of ~March~ 1555.




THE TRUE

PROPHECIES

OR

PROGNOSTICATIONS

OF

Michael Nostradamus,

Physician to HENRY II. FRANCIS II. And CHARLES IX. Kings of FRANCE,
and one of the most excellent Astronomers that ever were.




CENTURY I.


I.

    French.

    Estant assis, de nuit secrette estude,
    Seul, reposé sur la selle d’airain,
    Flambe exigüe, sortant de solitude,
    Fait proferer qui n’est a croire vain.

    English.

    Sitting by Night in my secret Study
    Alone, resting upon the Brazen Stool,
    A slight flame breaking forth out of that solitude,
    Makes me utter what is not in vain to believe.

ANNOTATION.

In this Stanza, Nostradamus expresseth those Humane dispositions
which he made use of to be favoured of God, for the knowledge of future
things, to the benefit of the Publick.

The first Disposition, was the tranquility of Mind, when he saith,
Sitting by night; Because a troubled Mind cannot see clearly the Things
it is busie about, no more than tossed Waters can distinctly represent
the Objects that are opposed to them. Thus we read in the Scripture,
that the Prophet Elishah, being transported with Zeal against Joram
King of Israel; and nevertheless willing to consult God concerning the
event of the Warr against the Moabites, called for a Minstrel, that the
Harmony of the Instrument might quiet his Mind, as it did happen. And
it came to pass when the Minstrel played, that the Hand of the Lord came
upon him, 2 Kings chap. 3. ver. 15.

The Author in his Dedicatory Epistle to his Son Cæsar, calleth
this Tranquility of Mind, A long Melancholick Inspiration; because
the Melancholick Humour and Mind sequestreth a Man from the concerns
of worldly things, and maketh him present to himself, so that his
Understanding is not darkned by a multitude of Species that troubles
its Operation.

The Second Disposition, was, the Silence of the Night; For Man who is
compounded of Body and Soul, doth notably intricate himself in External
things by the commerce of the Senses with the Objects; which obligeth
him to withdraw himself from visible things, when he intends to apply
himself to some serious Study. And as the silence of the Night causeth in
the Universe a cessation of noises and clashings in Business, Visits and
Colloquies, the Mind is then more at rest. Besides that, Night covering
with her Darkness our Hemisphere, our Senses are less distracted, and
our Internal Faculties are more united to serve the Operations of the
Understanding.

Therefore the Author in his two Liminary Epistles, makes often mention
of his continual Nocturnal Watchings, of his Sweet-smelling nocturnal
Studies, and of his Nocturnal and Prophetical Calculations.

The Third Disposition, was Solitariness; that is, having no other
Conversation then that of his Books, being retired in his Study, Alone.
For it seemeth that God commonly maketh use of Solitariness when he doth
impart himself to Men, and revealeth them his Oracles: And the Sybils
were chosen to be Prophets, as much for their Solitariness, as for their
Chastity.

The Author saith, that with those three Dispositions he raised himself
to the knowledge of future things; which is signified by those words,
Resting upon the Brazen Stool. Servius in his Commentaries upon
Virgil, speaking of this Brazen Stool, saith two things of it. The
First, that this Stool was a Table set upon a Trevet, called by the
Greeks τρίπους, and by the Latines Tripus. The Second is, that the
Sybils, or the Priests of the Delphick Temple of Apollo, got upon
that Table, when they went about to pronounce their Oracles. Pliny, in
his 33. Book, Chap. 3. saith, that they called those Tables Cortinas,
and that some were made of Brass for the use aforesaid.

From the use of that Brazen Trevet is come the Proverb, Ex tripode
loqui. When one speaketh like an Oracle. Thus the Author willing to
express, that being in his Study in the solitariness of the Night, he
raised himself to the Knowledge of Future things, to write them, and
transmit them to Posterity; he saith, He was sitting or resting upon the
Brazen Stool.

Thus raising himself, and taking his Pen in hand to write what he should
learn, he saith in the Third Verse, that A slight Flame, or small
Light did insinuate it self in his understanding, by whose splendor and
brightness he saw future things.

The Author in his Epistle to Cæsar his Son, expoundeth always this
Prophetical Light, by the comparison of a shining Flame, and calleth
it rather a Flame than a pure Light, because this Light doth not only
discover the Mysteries, but more-over it lightens in us a certain Heat
and Prophetical Power, as himself terms it; as if we should say a Sacred
Enthusiasm, even (saith he) as the Sun coming near us with his Light,
not only darteth upon all Elementary things the brightness of his Beams,
but withal infuseth in them a certain quickning heat, which causeth
the Vegetables to grow, and upholdeth the Being of all other natural
things; Even so (saith he) this good Genius, as the Ancients term it;
or as we Christians say, that Divine Spirit of Prophecy coming near
our understandings, not only importeth a Light to them, but more-over
a certain heat and Prophetical Power, which strenghteneth them in the
knowledge of the aforesaid things, and causeth them to breath out, as by
a Sacred Enthusiasm some Prophetical Verses.

Which happeneth to them (saith the Author) coming out of Solitude, that
is to say, when their Spirit stoopeth down, and by degrees cometh down
from that sublime Region and high elevation, taking the Pen to write down
the future time. Therefore he with his dispositions participating of that
slight flame, coming out of his solitude, began to write and to utter,
What is not in vain to believe.

The things that the Author hath written, shall not be unprofitable as we
have proved already, and the time will come, when by the means of Divine
Providence the Church shall receive the fruit thereof, at which we ought
not to wonder, seeing that God saith of himself in Isaiah Chap. 48.
Ver. 17. I am the Lord thy God, which teacheth thee to profit.

The Author foretelleth many wonders, of which we ought to be certain by
the verification of those that are already past, seeing that it is the
same Spirit that shewed them all.

The same Prophecies are also profitable, in that every where the Author
condemneth Seditious and Rebellious persons, and Prophecieth the Churches
Victory over her Enemies.

They are also profitable for particular Men that understand the meaning
of them, for by it they may provide for their own business, according to
the storm, undertaking nothing but upon sure grounds, following always
the best party, and disposing themselves to patience, when the calamities
are general, and involve together the guilty and guiltless. Therefore our
Author saith well, A slight flame breaking forth out of that solitude,
makes me utter what is not in vain to believe.


II.

    French.

    La Verge en main, mise au milieu des Branches,
    De l’Onde je moüille & le Limbe & le Pied,
    En peur j’escris fremissant par les manches;
    Splendeur Divine: le Divine prez s’assied.

    English.

    With Rod in hand, set in the middle of the Branches,
    With water I wet the Limb and the Foot,
    In fear I writ, quaking in my sleeves,
    Divine splendor! the Divine sitteth by.

ANNOT.

Amongst the customs, the Ancients observed, before they pronounced their
Oracles; one was to take a Tuffie Branch of Laurel, and with it dipt in
water, to sprinkle the edges and Columns of the Table, that was upon the
Brazen Trevet, by which ceremonies they procured credit to their Oracles.

The Author willing to let us know, that his Verses were not only a simple
writing, but also Prophetical and full of Oracles, doth represent them
to us by this Metaphore of the Ancients, when they did amuse the people
with their ambiguous, and many times fallacious Oracles.

Being then sitting and quiet in his solitariness; coming out of that
great devotion of mind, animated by the virtue of his good Genius, he
putteth first the Rod into his hand, that is the Pen, and putteth it
in the middle of the Branches, putting it between his Fingers. Secondly
he dippeth this Rod into Water, dipping his Pen in his Ink; with this
Pen dipt in Ink, he wetteth the Limb and the Foot, writing upon his
paper from one end to the other, and from the top to the bottom.

Which we must understand by this word Lymbe, which is a Latin word,
signifying the long and narrow pieces of stuffe, which women wore at the
bottom of their Petticoats, therefore the Latins called them Lymbos,
from the Latin Verbe Lambo, which in matter of cloths signifieth, to
leek or sweep; and because those pieces of cloath were in the bottom of
their Garments, the word hath been afterwards employed to signifie the
brims of some things, so that the Lymbs of a sheet of paper, are the two
margines, and the top and the bottom, as if it were the four ends of a
Quadrangular Figure.

The third Verse sheweth the internal disposition of the Author, after he
hath described his external one; that disposition was a Sacred quaking,
which putting his heart into a palpitation, caused his hands and arms to
shake, as if he had been taken with some fit of an Ague. This quaking is
the disposition which the good Genius causeth in Prophets, that they
may be humbled, and not be puffed up with pride, when they come near the
Majesty of God, as we read in Daniel, St. John, and the 4th. of
Esdras. Therefore the Author saith:

In fear I write, quaking in my sleeves. And because the Divine Spirit
after he hath cast down those, to whom he will impart himself, doth
afterwards quiet them; the Author therefore addeth, that a Divine
splendor did sit by him.


III.

    French.

    Quand la littiere du tourbillon versée,
    Et seront faces de leurs Manteaux couvers,
    La Republique par gens nouveaux vexée,
    Lors blancs & rouges jugeront a l’envers.

    English.

    When the litter shall be overthrown by a gust of wind,
    And faces shall be covered with Cloaks,
    The Common-wealth shall be troubled with a new kind of men,
    Then white and red shall judge amiss.

ANNOT.

The two first Verses signifie that a great tempestuous wind was to
happen, in which a litter should be overturned, and every one should
muffle his face in his Cloak, for the fierceness of the wind.

And that presently after the Common-wealth should be troubled with
new Sects and Opinions, which may be understood of the beginning of
Reformation by Luther and Calvin, which was about that time.

The last Verse by the white and red signifieth here (as it doth thorough
all the Book) the French and the Spaniards, because the French
wear white Scarfes, and the Spaniards red ones: and consequently the
troubles and jars that happened presently between those two Nations.


IV.

    French.

    Par l’Univers sera fait un Monarque,
    Qu’en paix & vie ne sera longuement,
    Lors se perdra la Piscature Barque,
    Sera regie en plus grand detriment.

    English.

    In the World shall be one Monarch,
    Who shall be not long alive, nor in peace,
    Then shall be lost the Fishing Boat,
    And be governed with worse detriment.

ANNOT.

That Monarch was Henry the II. King of France, who did not Reign
long, but was unfortunately slain, running at Tilt against the Earl of
Montgomery (as we shall see hereafter) and almost during all his Reign
had Wars with Charles the V. Emperour, and his Son Philip the II.
King of Spain; the said Emperour in that time did sack Rome, took the
Pope Clement the VII. prisoner, which is signified here; as also in
several other places by the loss of the Fishing Boat; the Roman Church
being often compared to a Ship or Boat.


V.

    French.

    Chassez seront sans faire long combat.
    Par le Païs seront plus fort grevez,
    Bourg & Cité auront plus grand debat,
    Carcas, Narbonne auront cœurs esprouvez.

    English.

    They shall be driven away without great fighting,
    Those of the Countrey shall be more grieved,
    Town and City shall have a greater debate,
    Carcas, Narbonne shall have their hearts tryed.

ANNOT.

Herein is nothing mystical, the meaning is that some of the Protestant
party intending to take or vex the Cities of Carcassone and Narbonne
in Languedoc, shall be easily repulsed, and shall afterward fall upon
the Countrey round about, which shall suffer for.


VI.

    French.

    L’œil de Ravenne sera destitué,
    Quand a ses pieds les aisles sailliront;
    Les deux de Bresse auront constitué,
    Turin, Verceil, que Gaulois fouleront.

    English.

    The eye of Ravenna shall be forsaken,
    When the wings shall rise at his feet,
    The two of Brescia shall have constituted,
    Turin, Verceil, which the French shall tread upon.

ANNOT.

This is a confirmation of the fourth Stanza, concerning the loss of the
Pope, Clement the VII. who is called here the eye of Ravenna, because
he is Lord of that famous City, which was once an Exarchat of the Empire.

The wings that shall rise at, or against his feet, shall be those of the
Eagle, which are the Arms of the Emperour.

The two of Brescia were the Governour and Proveditor of Venice in
that place, who would at that time have endeavoured to seize upon Turin
and Verceil, the two chiefest Towns of Piemont, but were prevented by
the French.


VII.

    French.

    Tard arrivé, l’execution faite,
    Le Vent contrare, Lettres au chemin prinses,
    Les Conjurez quatorze d’une Secte,
    Par le Rousseau seront les entreprinses.

    English.

    One coming too late, the execution shall be done,
    The Wind being contrary, and Letters intercepted by the way,
    The Conspirators fourteen of a Sect,
    By the Red-hair’d Man the undertaking shall be made.

ANNOT.

The sense of the whole is this, there shall be fourteen Conspirators
of one mind, and their Ring-leader, a Red-haired man, who shall be put
to death, because their Reprieve could not come timely enough, being
hindered by cross winds, and Letters intercepted. I could find no
particular things in History concerning this.


VIII.

    French.

    Combien de fois prinse Cité Solaire,
    Seras, changeant les Loix barbares & vaines,
    Ton mal s’approche, plus seras tributaire,
    Le grand Adrie recouvrira tes veines.

    English.

    How often taken O solar City,
    Shalt thou be? changing the barbarian and vain Laws,
    Thy evil growth nigh, thou shalt be more tributary,
    The great Adria shall recover thy veins.

ANNOT.

It is hard to judge what he meaneth by the Solar City that shall be so
often taken.

As by Adria, it is certain he meaneth Venice, that was so called
anciently, because of its scituation in the Adriatick Sea.


IX.

    French.

    De l’Orient viendra le cœur punique,
    Fascher Adrie, & les hoirs Romulides,
    Accompagné de la classe Libique,
    Trembler Melites, & proches Isles vuides.

    English.

    From the East shall come the African heart,
    To vex Adria, and the Heirs of Romulus,
    Accompanied with the Libian fleet
    Melites shall tremble, and the Neighbouring Islands be empty.

ANNOT.

This was a clear and true Prognostication of that famous Invasion made
upon Maltha, by the grand Signor Solyman the magnificent, in the
year of our Lord 1565. and just ten years after the writing of this
Prophecy, wherein that Island, and some of the Neighbouring ones were
wholly depopulated by the Turks, to the terror of Venice, called
here Adria, and of all the Islands of the Adriatick Sea. For the
better understanding of this, the Reader must observe, that Punicus in
Latin signifieth Africa, so that the African heart signifieth the
help the Turk had from Tunis, Tripoly, and Algier, Cities seated
in Africa, and under the Turkish Dominion; by which not only Maltha
(which in Latin is Melita) but Venice and Rome were put into a
great fright; the conclusion of this Siege was, that after six weeks
time, and the loss of 26000. Men, the Turks were constrained shamefully
to retire. Vide the Turkish History.


X.

    French.

    Sergens transmis dans la Cage de Fer,
    Ou les Enfans septains du Roy sont pris,
    Les vieux & Peres sortiront bas d’Enfer,
    Ains mourir voir de son fruit mort & cris.

    English.

    Sergeants sent into an Iron Cage,
    Where the seven Children of the King are,
    The old Men and Fathers shall come out of Hell,
    And before they die shall see the death and cries of their fruit.

ANNOT.

This Prophecy signifieth, that some Sergeants or Executioners shall be
sent into a Prison, to put to death seven Children, servants of a King
that were Imprisoned there, and that some old Men their Fathers, shall
see their death, and hear their cries.


XI.

    French.

    Le mouvement de Sens, Cœur, Pieds, & Mains,
    Seront d’accord, Naples, Leon, Sicile,
    Glaives, Feux, Eaux, puis au Noble Romains,
    Plongez, Tuez, Morts, par cerveau debile.

    English.

    The motion of the Sense, Heart, Feet and Hands,
    Shall agree, Naples, Leon, Sicily,
    Swords, Fires, Waters, then to the noble Romans,
    Dipt, Killed, Dead, by a weak-brain.

ANNOT.

The two first Verses signifie the concord that shall be among the
Spanish dominions, expressed here by Sense, Heart, Feet, and
Hands. After which, the Romans or those of Rome, shall be evilly
intreated, being drowned, killed, and put to death by a weak brain.
I guess this to have come to pass, when the Emperour Charles the V.
his Army sacked Rome, under the command of the Duke of Bourbon, who
was killed at the Assault; and of the Prince of Orange, who permitted
licentiousness to his Souldiers, and suffered them to commit more
violence, than ever the Goths or Vandales did, and therefore is
called here weak brain. This Prince of Orange was of the House of
Chalon, after which came that of Nassau.


XII.

    French.

    Dans peu ira fauce brute fragile,
    De bas en haut eslevé promptement,
    Puis en estant desloyal & labile,
    Qui de Verone aura gouvernment.

    English.

    Within a little while a false frail brute shall go,
    From low to high, being quickly raised,
    By reason that he shall have the Government of Verona,
    Shall be unfaithful and slippery.

ANNOT.

This foretelleth of a wicked person, who in a short time shall be from
a low degree exalted to a high one, by reason that those that have the
Government of Verona, shall be unfaithful and slippery. That person
seemeth to be some Pope, who from a low degree shall be exalted to that
dignity, by the unfaithfulness and slipperiness of the Venetians, who
are now Lords of the City Verona in Italy.


XIII.

    French.

    Les exiles, par ire, haine intestine,
    Feront au Roy grand conjuration,
    Secret mettront ennemis par la mine,
    Et les vieux siens, contre eux sedition.

    English.

    The banished, by choler, and intestine hatred
    Shall make against the King a great conspiracy,
    They shall put secret enemies in the mine,
    And the old his own against them sedition.

ANNOT.

Although this Prophecie seemeth to be indefinitely spoken, because in
every Countrey or Kingdom where there is banished people, they most
commonly plot against their King and Countrey; nevertheless I find two
remarkable Histories to make this good, one in France, and the other in
England. That of France is thus.

The Cardinal of Lorrain, and the Duke of Guise his Brother, being
in great favour with Henry II. the Queen Mother promoted them in the
beginning of the Reign of Francis II. his successor, so that the
Cardinal was made Lord high Treasurer, and the Duke General of the
Armies, to the prejudice of the Constable of Montmorency. Those two
favourites, fearing the persecution that is raised by envy, did remove
all the great ones from the Court, whether they were commanded to do so,
or whether they had any other pretences.

The Princes of Condé, and of la Roche sur yon, were sent into
Flanders to Philip II. Condé, to confirm the alliance between the
two Crowns, and la Roche sur yon to carry the Order of France.

Diana of Poitiers Dutchess of Valentenois, was banished from Court,
and compelled to surrender to the Queen all the Jewels she had extorted
from the King, besides the Castle of Chenonceaux, which the Queen took
for her self.

The Marshal St. Andrew was likewise banished from the Court. The King
of Navarre was in Bearn.

The Constable took also his leave, and surrendred to the King the Seal
of his Office. On the other side, the Protestants began to stir notably,
having on their part many Princes, as that of Condé, of Porcien,
Gaspard, of Coligny, Admiral of France, d’Andelot, and the
Cardinal of Chastillon his brothers, Magdalene of Mailly, their
Sister, Lady of Roye, the King of Navarre. All these discontented
persons, and the Protestants made a great conspiracy under pretence of
Religion, and of freeing the King from the tyranny of the Guisians.

They did by Choler, the Protestants because they had been so ill
used, in the time of Francis I. and Henry II. and lately by the
Guisians. And the discontented, for to pull down their power, it was
also by an intestine hatred, because the Constable could not brook to
be dispossessed of his Office of great Master, which was given to the
Duke of Guise; and the others to see themselves from the management of
Affairs, and the Protestants by the spirit of a contrary Religion.

Their conspiracy tended to expel the Guisians, and to seise upon the
Queen, the King, and his Brothers.

To compass their end, they secretly sent some trusty persons of their
own, who nevertheless feigned to be their Enemies; insomuch that the King
of Navarre sent them word, that he would be always of their party,
though apparently he took the Courts part.

But the Old his own, saith the fourth Verse, that is to say, the Kings
old friends shall raise Sedition against them, which happened in the
year 1650. when the Guisians having discovered the conspiracy that was
made at Nantes, the 1. of February 1560. whose chief Ring-leader was
the Lord La Renaudie; they presently got the King out of Blois, and
carryed him to Amboise, caused the Town to be fortified, and set strong
Guards upon all the passages.

The day appointed for the execution of the conspiracy at Blois, was the
10th of March: But the King being got to Amboise, the Conspirators
went thither in such great numbers, and under such specious pretences,
that had they not been betrayed, no body would have suspected them.
All the Suburbs and the Countrey Towns thereabouts were full of them.
The Prince of Condé, the Admiral, d’Andelot, and his Brother the
Cardinal, were all there.

Then the Guisians began to fall to work, and to set upon the
Conspirators on all sides.

Abundance were taken, some in the City, some in the Suburbs, others in
the Countrey round about.

Most of these were slain before they could come to Town, or be carried
to Prison. And their process was so short that they were hanged in their
Boots and Spurs.

The Scouts did every where kill those they met withall. To conclude, it
proved a very Bloody Tragedy.

La Renaudie the Chief of the Conspirators, was met with by the Lord
Pardaillan a Gascon. At the first approach La Renaudie killed him;
but himself was killed by Pardeillan’s Servant, and his dead body
brought and hanged at Amboise.

The second History is concerning England, which palpably makes this
Prophecie good, if we make reflection upon what hath happened in this
last Century of years, concerning banished people that have conspired
against their King and Countrey, as we may see through all the Life of
Queen Elizabeth, and by that famous Plot of the Gun-powder-Treason in
King James’s time, which must be understood here by the Mine.


XIV.

    French.

    De gens esclave, chansons, chants, & requestes,
    Captifs par Princes, & Seigneurs aux prisons,
    A l’advenir par Idiots sans testes,
    Seront receus par divins oraisons.

    English.

    From slavish people, Songs, Tunes and requests,
    Being kept Prisoners by Princes and Lords,
    For the future by headless Idiots,
    Shall be admitted by divine prayers.

ANNOT.

This is a prognostication of the beginning and increase of the
Protestants in France, who began to sing their Psalms in French, and
from time to time presented their request for tolleration. The Author
being a zealous Papist calleth them Idiots, and that notwithstanding
the persecution that should be against them, being put in Prison by
Princes and Lords, they should at last be admitted by reason of their
often praying to God.


XV.

    French.

    Mars nous menace par la force bellique,
    Septante fois fera le sang respandre,
    Auge & ruine de l’Ecclesiastique,
    Et par ceux qui d’eux rien ne voudront entendre.

    English.

    Mars threatneth us of a Warlike force,
    Seventy times he shall cause blood to be shed,
    The flourishing and ruine of the Clergy,
    And by those that will hear nothing from them.

ANNOT.

The Author having premonished us in his Preface, that God having imparted
to him the knowledge of many future things, he was curious to know if
his Divine Majesty had written the same thing in the Cœlestial Book,
as concerning the States, Empires, Monarchies, Provinces and Cities,
and he found that it was even so as it had been revealed to him, so
that the Book of Heaven, written with Gods own hand, in so many shining
Characters, might serve to studious men for a light and a Torch to
discover very near the common estate of the world.

He then having learned from God in his solitariness, the prosperities
and afflictions of the Clergy, from the beginning of the year 1555. to
the end of the world; he found that there was an agreement between his
prophetical Knowledge, and the motion of the Heavenly Bodies; because
having made the Systeme of the years after 1550. he found that Mars was
in a dangerous Aspect to the Ecclesiastical estate, and found that this
Planet by its position did presage a long, bloody and horrid Catastrophe
in the world, by which the Ecclesiastical estate should suffer much.

To make good this prediction, the Author doth assure us in his Preface,
that he had considered the disposition of this Planet, not only in the
year 1555. but also in the years following, and joyning together all
that he had found in his Ephemerides, he found that this Planet did on
all sides presage most bloody actions. Although, saith he, the Planet
of Mars maketh an end of its course, and is come to its last Period:
nevertheless it will begin it again, but some gathered in Aquarius for
many years, and others by long and continual years.

As if he would say that his prediction ought not to be rejected; because
Mars ended his course, and cometh to its late period; for it would take
again its Exaltation and Dominion with a worse conjunction, having his
Astronomical dignities, with the Conjunction of other Planets in the Sign
of Aquarius during many years, and in the Sign of Cancer for many
years more.

Which maketh the Author conclude, that within the space of 177. years,
three months and eleven dayes, the world shall be afflicted with Wars,
Plagues, Famines and Innundations, that scarce any body shall be left to
Till the Ground. By which prediction we learn that those evils began in
the year 1555. the first of March, which is the date of the Authors
Book, and shall last till the second of June 1732. abating the ten days
of the Gregorian Calender.

During which time, he saith, that Mars threatneth us with bloody Wars
that shall be reiterated 70 times.

This word seventy doth not signifie a determinate number, but a great
number indeterminated according to the Phrase of the Scripture, which
by the number of seven signifieth many times, and by that of seventy
incomparably many times more. Thus the Scripture saith, that the just man
falleth seven times in one day, that is many times, and our Saviour saith
to St. Peter, that we ought to forgive our Enemies, not only seven
times, but seventy times seven; that is innumerable times.

We have found the truth of this Prophecie to this very day. 1. In
France, by the Wars between Henry II. and Charles V. and Philip
II. 2. By the Wars of Charles IX. against the Protestants, wherein
so much blood was spilt on both sides. 3. By Henry III. against
the same Protestants, and factions of his time, and then against the
Parisians and others of their league. 4. Between Henry IV. and
those of the league in his revolted Kingdom. 5. By the Wars of Lewis
XIII. against the Protestants, against the Duke of Savoy, in the
Valteline, in Piemont, in Lorrain, in Alsatia, in Catalonia, in
Franche-Conty, in Flanders, and for the defence of Portugal, which
have been continued by his successor Lewis XIV. now Reigning.

Italy did also find the truth of this prophecie, by the Wars between
Paul IV. and the Spaniard, between Pius V. and the Turks, between
Clement VIII. and the Duke of Ferrara, between the Emperour and the
Duke of Mantua, between Urban VIII. and the Duke of Parma, between
the Venetians and the Florentines, by the revolt of the Kingdom of
Naples, under the conduct of the Duke of Guise.

England hath had its share of it under Queen Elizabeth, by the revolt
of Yorkshire, and some other Provinces, by the Spanish fleet of 88.

By the death of Queen Mary, by the revolt of the Kingdom against
Charles I. And by the horrid perfidiousness of Cromwel.

Germany hath made it good by the War against the Turks, the
Protestants and the Swedes.

Poland hath done the same against the Russians, Tartars, Turks,
Cassaks and Swedes.

And Venice against the Turk, for the Islands of Cyprus and
Candia, the Battle of Lepanto, and the Wars of Dalmatia.

This Mars besides presageth two contrary things, one is the Auge
or Exaltation, the other the ruine of the Clergy: where it is to be
observed, the Auge in tearms of Astrology signifieth mounting or
ascending, and cometh from the Latin verbe augere, which signifieth to
augment or increase. This augmentation and ruine of the Clergy is made
good by the several changes that have been in the Ecclesiastical estate,
in France, England, Low-Countreys, Denmark, Swede, Poland,
Hungary, Valachia, Transylvania, Moldavia, Dalmatia, Geneva,
Switzerland, &c.

The fourth Verse saith. By those that will hear nothing from them: that
is, by the Protestants that will hear nothing from the Roman Catholicks.


XVI.

    French.

    Faux a l’Estang, joint vers la Sagittaire,
    En son haut Auge de l’Exaltation,
    Peste, Famine, mort de main Militaire,
    Le Siecle approcher de renovation.

    English.

    The Sith to the Fish-pond, joyned to Sagittarius,
    In the highest Auge of the Exaltation,
    Plague, Famine, Death by a Military hand,
    The age groweth near to its renovation.

ANNOT.

The sense of all this is, that when a Meadow that was a Fish-pond
before, shall be Mowed, the Sign of Sagittarius being in its Auge or
ascendant, then shall Plague, Famine, and War Reign, and that age
(which a Century of years shall be near its end and renovation viz. of
another Century.)


XVII.

    French.

    Par quarante ans l’Iris n’apparoistra,
    Par quarante ans tous les jours sera veu,
    La Terre aride en siccité croistra,
    Et grand deluge quand sera apparceu.

    English.

    During fourty years the Rainbow shall not appear,
    During fourty years it shall be seen every day.
    The parched Earth shall wax dryer and dryer,
    And great Flouds shall be when it shall appear.

ANNOT.

The Interpretation of this is easie, and signifieth nothing else but that
during 40. years the Rainbow shall not be seen, and during that time
there shall be an exceeding great drought upon the Earth, and that for
40. years after the Rainbow shall be seen every day, which shall cause
great flouds and innundations.


XVIII.

    French.

    Par la discorde, negligence Gauloise,
    Sera passage a Mahomet ouvert,
    De sang trempé la Terre & Mer Senoise,
    Le Port Phocen de Voiles & Nefs couvert.

    English.

    Through the discord and negligence of the French,
    A passage shall be opened to Mahomet,
    The Land and Sea of Sienna shall be bloody,
    The Phocen Haven shall be covered with Sails and Ships.

ANNOT.

In the year 1559. Sultan Solyman called Leonclavius, according to the
alliance made between him and Francis I. King of France, was desired
by Henry II. his Son to send him some succours: Whereupon he sent
some of his Gallies to scour the Tyrrhenean Sea (otherwise the Sea of
Tuscany) to give a diversion to the Spanish forces in Italy, while
the King by the means of the Marshal of Brissac, should continue his
Conquests in the Piemont and Milanese.

All what this Turkish Fleet did, was to plunder and over-run the
Island of Elbe, and to attempt Piombino without effect; and because
these places were seated upon the Sea of Sienna, called in Latin Mare
Tirrhenum, the Author saith that both the Land and Sea of Sienna shall
be died with Blood, and at that time the Haven of Marseilles, which
was called by the Ancients, Port-Phocen was full of Sales and Ships,
as well to go into the Island of Corse, as for other designs. This
History makes good that Stanza which saith, that through the discord
and negligence of the French, a passage shall be opened to Mahomet,
wherein it is to be observed that the Marshal of Brissac doing wonders
for the King in Piemont, his virtue got him abundance of enviers and
enemies in the Kings Councel, which was the cause of a great discord
among them, by the diversity of opinions, and this diversity was the
cause of a prodigious negligence in sending to him relief, as Turpin
witnesseth in his History of Naples, and Paradin in the continuation
of his History.

By this discord and negligence, a passage was opened to Mahomet, his
Fleet going freely upon the Mediterranean Sea near the Coasts of
France. And the reason of it was, because this discord and negligence
did compel Henry the II. to ask succours of Solyman, that the
Spaniard might be compelled to divide his Forces in sending some to the
Sea-Towns, and so should not be so strong in Piemont; and thus must be
understood the French discord and negligence, in the first and second
Verse. As for the many Sails and Ships that were then in the Haven of
Marseilles, to go into the Island of Corsica, the following Stanza’s
are full of predictions concerning it.


XIX.

    French.

    Lors que Serpens viendront circuir l’Air,
    Le sang Troien versé par les Espagnes,
    Par eux: grand nombre en sera fait tare,
    Chef fuit, caché aux Marets dans les saignes.

    English.

    When Serpents shall come to encompass the Are,
    The Trojan blood shall be vexed by Spain,
    By them, a great number shall perish,
    Chief runneth away, and is hid in the rushes of the Marishes.

ANNOT.

By the Serpents, the Author being a Roman Catholick, meaneth the
Protestants, who then began to appear numerous in the Reigns of Francis
the I. and Henry the II. in whose time the Admiral Coligny was the
chief among them, for his great feats in War.

These Serpents or Protestants begun to encompass the Are, that is to
say, the Church and the Altar, which in Latin is called Ara.

And that happened when the Trojan-blood was vexed by Spain. By the
Trojan-blood, the Author meaneth the French blood, according to the
vulgar opinion, that the French are descended from the Trojans.
The French were then vexed by the Spaniards, at the Battle of St.
Laurence, and at the taking of St. Quentin, and other places in the
Year 1557.

The third Verse saith by them, that is, by the Protestants a great
number shall perish, that is to say, a great number of French. Among
whom the Admiral of Chatillon having done what was possible to be done
at the defence of St. Quentin, and seeing the Town taken, run away
with three more, and hid himself among the Rushes that are in the Boggs
about the Town, where he was found, and carried Prisoner to the Duke of
Savoy, who received him very honorably, according to his valour and
deserts.

Observe that the word Saignes here signifieth in old Provencal a
Marish.


XX.

    French.

    Tours, Orleans, Blois, Angers, Renes & Nantes,
    Cités vexées par soudain changement,
    Par Langues estranges seront tendues Tentes,
    Fleuves, Darts, Rennes, Terre & Mer tremblement.

    English.

    Tours, Orleans, Blois, Angers, Renes, and Nantes,
    Cities vexed by a sudden change,
    By strange Languages Tents shall be set up,
    Rivers, Darts, Rennes, Land, and Sea shall quake.

ANNOT.

All the Cities mentioned in the first Verse are seated by the River
of Loire, and are threatned here of a sudden change, and that some
strangers shall set up their Tents against them, and chiefly at Rennes,
there shall be an Earth-quake felt both by Sea and Land.


XXI.

    French.

    Profonde argile blanche nourrit rocher,
    Qui d’un abysme istra l’acticineuse,
    En vain troublez ne l’oseront toucher,
    Ignorant estre au fond terre argileuse.

    English.

    A deep white clay feedeth a Rock,
    Which clay shall break out of the deep like milk,
    In vain people shall be troubled not daring to touch it,
    Being ignorant that in the bottom there is a milky clay.

ANNOT.

It is a Rock in the middle of the Sea, whose Roots are fed by a white
clay, which is at the foot of this Rock, in the bottom of the Sea, and
therefore called deep.

This clay being softned, and dissolved by the Sea-water, shall appear
upon the superficies of it like milk about the Rock. Those that shall see
this wonder, being ignorant that in the bottom there is a milky clay,
shall in vain be troubled at it, and shall not dare to touch it.


XXII.

    French.

    Ce qui vivra & n’aura aucun sens,
    Viendra le Fer a mort son artifice,
    Autun, Chalons, Langres & les deux Sens,
    La Guerre & la Glasse fera grand malefice.

    English.

    That which shall live, and shall have no sence,
    The Lion shall destroy the art of it,
    Autun, Chalons, Langres, and both Sens,
    The War and the Ice shall do great harm.

ANNOT.

This is a great Riddle, which was never found out till now; and had I not
been born in the Countrey where the History did happen, it might have
been unknown to this day, and buried in oblivion.

[Sidenote: The History of a λιθοπαίδιον or petrified child.]

In the year of the Lord 1613. which was that of my Birth. There was in
the Town of Sens a Taylors Wife named Columba Chatry, who presently
after her marriage conceived, and for the space of 28. years persuaded
her self to be with Child, had all the signs of it in the beginning of
her impregnation, and having gone her compleat time, she begun to feel
the pains of a woman in Labour, with great gripings in the Guts. The
Urine was suppressed for a while, but at last it broke out with a strong
current. This quantity of water not coming so much out of the Bladder as
was supposed, as from the womb, by the breaking of the Membrane, called
Amnion, seeing that with those serous excrements, she avoided some
conjealed blood. After that her breast begun to fall, and the Child had
little or no motion, her pains being less than they were, which caused
no small admiration to the Midwifes, who expected a safe deliverance.
For the space of three years after, this woman kept her Bed, and was
brought to Deaths door, complaining of gripings and a hard swelling,
which she desired all the Physitians and Chyrurgeons to feel, having
lost all appetite, but that little which she recovered by the use of
sharp things, as Verjuice, Lemmons, &c. she was wont to say to her
Neighbours, that she bare a Child that should be the cause of her death.
After she was dead, her Husband got two experienced Chyrurgeons to open
her body, who having opened the belly, and taken away the Peritonæum,
saw the Womb of several colours, as the flesh that is about the head and
neck of a Turky-cock, but as it were of a Horny substance. They begun to
make an incision in it with a Rasour, but finding it resisted the edge,
they begun to use their Incision knives with all their strength; at last
one of them by chance hit the Scull, and after that some Ribs, and then
the Shoulder bone, by which, knowing that there was bones contained in
that lump, with greater strength they made a deeper incision, and having
parted the edges of the womb, saw in the bottom of the womb a Child,
wrapped in the membrane, called Allantoides; at which the Chyrugeons
wondering, sent for the Physitians to have their opinion in a thing that
is almost beyond belief; in the mean time people flocking thither from
all parts, and troubling the Chyrurgeons in their operation; they thought
good to take away with their Instruments all that Lump, as a Tree from
its Roots, and to carry it home, that they might with more time and
leasure examine the whole Anatomy of it. In that hasty pulling out of the
Child, they had no time to observe what Chorion it had, what umbilical
Vessels, and what connexion there was of the Allantoides with the Womb,
and with the Child, chiefly about the right hip, the Buttocks, and the
Back-bone being all grown solid together.

The scituation of the Child was almost Spherical, the face leaning upon
the breast, and the Nostrils upon the Knees; the bones of the Head were
but thin, but very hard, and shining like Horn; the skin of the Head
was hairy in many places; the head did hang so much upon the left arm,
that the Ear, and part of the skull had given way to the Shoulder-bone;
the Elbow was bent towards the Shoulder stretching only his hand, which
was so close shut, and the fingers sticking so fast to the Palm of it,
that although they did appear distinct one from another, nevertheless it
was all but one and the same stone; the right arm did stretch its hand
towards the Navel, which unadvisedly was broken by the wrist, and left
in the Mothers Belly; the left Thigh, Knee and Leg were on the top of
the right ones, with which they were so entangled, that the left heel,
and the sole of the foot were planted upon the right foot, who seemed
to have given place to them, and were almost inseparably joyned; for all
such hardness of the matter, the body was not less than that of other
Children of the same age, but kept a perfect fulness and proportion
all the internal parts, as the Brains, the Heart, the Liver, had their
natural shape, and were not altogether so hard as the external parts, so
that to this very day this little body defieth all kind of corruption.

This Child was kept in my time by one Mr. Michel a Chirurgion of
Sens, who kindly shewed it to all the strangers that came far and near
to see it. The Fame of it was so great, that Doctor Mayerne coming from
Switzerland to England, took his way through Sens to see it, and
would have perswaded King Charles I. to buy it, as himself told me;
since that I hear it was fallen into the hands of the Venetians. In
this History there is two observable wonders. One, that the Child dying
in the Womb, did not corrupt, and so cause the death of its Mother. The
other, by what vertue or power of the body this child was petrified,
seeing that the Womb is a hot and moist place, and therefore more subject
to putrifaction. Those that will satisfie themselves with the reasons of
it, and the truth of the History, may read Johannes Alibosius Physician
of Sens, who was an eye witness of it, and Sennertus in his book of
Sympt. quam feminis in utero accidant.

Now this accident being so rare, and without parallel, our Author
thought fit to foretel it, and to cover it in abscure tearms, that he
might not appear ridiculous in so admirable an event. When therefore he
saith, That which shall live and shall have no Sense, he meaneth this
λιθοπαίδιον or child petrified, which had a Life while it was in the
Mothers belly, being tied to it by the several Vessels and connexions,
known to Anatomists, and yet was senseless in that it was petrified. When
in the second verse he saith, The Iron shall destroy the art of it, he
meaneth that it should be spoiled by the rasour, in the two last verses
he saith, that the Towns of Autun, Chalons, Langres, and Sens the
Town in which this did happen should that same year suffer much damage by
Hail and Ice, which did come to pass, as many persons may justify in that
Countrey, that are alive to this day.


XXIII.

    French.

    Au mois troisiesme se levant le Soleil,
    Sanglier, Leopard, aux champs Mars pour combatre,
    Leopard lassé au Ciel esttend son œil,
    Un Aigle autour du Soleil voit sesbatre.

    English.

    In the third month at the rising of the Sun,
    The Boar and Leopard in Marth camp to fight;
    The Leopard weary, lift his eyes to Haven,
    And seeth an Eagle playing about the Sun.

ANNOT.

This signifieth a particular accident, viz. that in the third Month,
which is that of March, at the rising of the Sun, the Boar and the
Leopard, that is, two persons of quality hidden under these names,
shall go into the fields to fight a Duel. The Leopard one of them being
weary, shall lift up his eyes to Heaven, calling upon God, and thereupon
shall see an Eagle playing about the Sun, that is, shall get the
Victory, of which the Eagle is the Emblem.


XXIV.

    French.

    A Cité nevue pensif pour condamner,
    Loisel de proie au ciel se vient offrir,
    Apres Victoire a Captifs pardonner
    Cremone & Mantoue grands maux auront souffert.

    English.

    In the new City for to condemn a Prisoner,
    The Bird of pray shall offer himself to Heaven,
    After the Victory, the Prisoners shall be forgiven,
    After Cremona and Mantua have suffered many troubles.

ANNOT.

This name of new City is appropriated to several ones in every Countrey.
The French have many Villeneufuas, the Germans many Newstads, the
Italians and Spaniards many Villanovas, so that it is hard to guess
which of them the Author meaneth. The missing of this dore makes the rest
of the Prophecie so obscure, that I had rather leave it to the liberty of
the Reader, than to pretend a true explication of it. I shall only say,
that Cremona and Mantua are two famous Towns in Italy, which are
here threatned.


XXV.

    French.

    Perdu, trouvé, caché de si long siecle
    Sera Pasteur demy-Dieu honoré,
    Ains que la Lune acheve son grand Siecle,
    Par autre vents sera deshonoré.

    English.

    Lost, found again, hidden so great a while,
    A Pastor as Deme-God shall be honoured;
    But before the Moon endeth her great Age,
    By other winds he shall be dishonoured.

ANNOT.

The Prophecie is concerning the body of a famous Churchman, which was
lost, and shall be found again, and worshiped as a Demy-God, but before
the Moon hath run her great age, which is of 13 Months, it shall be
vilified and dishonoured.


XXVI.

    French.

    Le grand du Foudre tombe d’heure diurne,
    Mal & predit par Porteur populaire,
    Suivant presage tombe d’heure nocturne,
    Conflit Rheims, Londres, Etrusque Pestifere.

    English.

    The great Man falleth by the Lightning in the day time,
    An evil foretold by a common Porter;
    According to this foretelling another falleth in the night,
    A fight at Rhemes, and the Plague at London and Tuscany.

ANNOT.

This is concerning some great man, who being premonished by a common
Carrier not to travel upon a certain day, did slight the advice, and was
strucken by Lightning in the day time, and another in the night; at the
same time there was a fight at Rhemes, and the Plague at London and
in Tuscany, which in Latin is called Etruria.


XXVII.

    French.

    Des soubs le Chesne Guyen du Ciel frappé,
    Non loin de la est caché le Thresor,
    Qui par long Siecles avoit esté grappé,
    Trouvé mourra, l’œil crevé de ressor.

    English.

    Under the Oak Guyen strucken from Heaven,
    Not far from it is the Treasure hidden,
    Which hath been many Ages a gathering;
    Being found he shall die, the eye put out by a spring.

ANNOT.

The sense of it is, that some body (who is named here Guyen) being
under an Oak shall be strucken with the lightning, and that near that
place there is a great Treasure, that hath been many years a gathering,
and that he who shall find it shall die, being shot in the eye with a
Fire-lock.


XXVIII.

    French.

    La Tour de Bouk craindra fuste Barbare,
    Un temps, long temps apres Barque Hesperique,
    Bestial, gens meubles tous deux feront grand tare,
    Taurus & Libra, quelle mortelle pique?

    English.

    The Tower of Bouk shall be in fear of a Barbarian Fleet,
    For a while, and long after afraid of Spanish shipping,
    Flocks, peoples, goods both shall receive great damage,
    Taurus and Libra, O what a deadly feud.

ANNOT.

The Tower of Bouk is a strong place seated by the Rhosne, where it
entereth into the Mediterranean Sea; it is said here that it shall be in
fear of a Barbarian Fleet, and after that of a Spanish one, and that
both the Spaniard and the French shall have great losses in Cattle,
People and Goods, and this shall happen when the Sun shall be in the
Signs of Taurus and Libra.


XXIX.

    French.

    Quand le Poisson, Terrestre & Aquatique,
    Par forte vague an gravier sera mis,
    Sa forme estrange suave & horrifique,
    Par Mer aux murs bien tost les Enemies.

    English.

    When the Fish that is both Terrestrial and Aquatick,
    By a strong Wave shall be cast upon the Sand,
    With his strange fearful sweet horrid form,
    Soon after the enemies will come near to the Walls by Sea.

ANNOT.

This signifieth no more but that after, a Fish, Terrestrial and Aquatick,
that is which, liveth in Land and Water, called by the Greeks αμφίβιον,
shall be cast upon the Sand by a storm, then a little while after, that
Town which lieth near to that place where the Fish was cast, shall be
Besieged by her Enemies, who shall come by Sea.


XXX.

    French.

    La Nef estrange par le tourment Marin,
    Abordera pres le Port incognu,
    Nonobstant signs du rameau palmerin,
    Apres mort, pille, bon advis tard venu.

    English.

    The Outlandish Ship by a Sea storm,
    Shall come near the unknown Haven,
    Notwitstanding the signs given to it with Bows,
    It shall die, be plundered, a good advice come too late.

ANNOT.

It is a Forrein Ship which by a storm shall be driven to an unknown
Harbour, and notwithstanding the signs that shall be made to it with
Branches, by those that are upon the Land to beware of the entrance of
the Harbour, it shall be cast away, and plundered; thus a good advice
shall come too late.


XXXI.

    French.

    Tant d’ans les guerres, en Gaule dureront,
    Outre la course du Castulon Monarque,
    Victoire incerte trois grands couroneront,
    Aigle, Coq, Lune, Lion Soleil en marque.

    English.

    So many years the Wars shall last in France,
    Beyond the course of the Castulon Monarque,
    An uncertain Victory three great ones shall Crown,
    The Eagle, the Cock, the Moon, the Lion having the Sun in its mark.

ANNOT.

That is, the Wars shall last so long in France after the death of one
King of Spain, till three great ones shall challenge an uncertain
Victory, these three great ones are the Emperour designed by the Aigle,
the King of France by the Cock, and the Turk by the Moon, and this
shall happen when the Sun is in the sign of the Lion. I suppose that came
to pass in the time of Charles the V. Henry the II. and Soliman.
For the Turk had no great odds upon the Emperour, nor he upon the King
of France.


XXXII.

    French.

    La grand Empire sera tost translaté,
    En lieu petit qui bien tost viendra croistre,
    Lieu bien infime d’exigue Comté,
    Ou au milieu viendra poser son Scepter.

    English.

    The great Empire shall soon be translated,
    Into a little place which shall soon grow afterwards.
    An inferiour place of a small County,
    In the middle of which he shall come to lay down his Scepter.

ANNOT.

This is concerning the same Charles the V. Emperour, who about three
years before his death, being weary of the World, resigned his Dominions
of Spain and of the Low-Countries, to his Son Philip the II.
and his Empire to his Brother Ferdinand, and retired himself into a
Monastery of Castile, called l’Escurial, which after his death, was
much enlarged and beautified by his Son Philip: and that is the meaning
of our Author when he saith:

    Into a little place which shall soon grow afterwards,
    An inferiour place of a small County,

For this Escurial being seated in a Desert place of a County of
Spain, called Castilia, which the Spanish vanity calleth a Kingdom,
(whose Use, Fruit, or Revenues, the said Charles only reserved for his
maintenance) is now by the Spaniards accounted to be the eighth wonder
of the World.


XXXIII.

    French.

    Pres d’un grand Pont de plaine spacieuse,
    Le grand Lion par force, Cesarées,
    Fera abatre hors Cité rigoureuse,
    Par effroy portes luy seront reserrées.

    English.

    A great Bridge near a spacious Plain,
    The great Lion by Cæsarean Forces,
    Shall cause to be pulled down, without the rigorous City,
    For fear of which, the Gates shall be shut to him.

ANNOT.

The meaning of this is, that a great Captain, Commander of the Imperial
Forces, shall cause a Bridge that was built near a spacious Plain to be
thrown down. The City near the Bridge being terrified at it, shall shut
up their Gates against him.


XXXIV.

    French.

    L’Oiseau de proye volant a la Fenestre,
    Avant conflict, fait au Francois parure,
    L’un bon prendra, l’autre ambigue sinistre,
    La partie foible tiendra pour bonne augure.

    English.

    The Bird of Prey flying to the Window,
    Before Battle, shall appear to the French;
    One shall take a good omen of it, the other a bad one,
    The weaker part shall hold it for a good sign.

ANNOT.

It is a Hawk which in presence of two Armies ready to give Battle,
shall fly to a window and perch upon it, in the presence of them all,
one of the Armies shall take it for a good sign; and the other, for an
ambiguous and sinister one. In Conclusion, the weaker party shall get the
Victory.


XXXV.

    French.

    Le Lion jeune le vieux surmontera,
    En champ bellique par singulier Duelle,
    Dans Cage dor Lœil il lui crevera,
    Deux playes une puis mourir mort cruelle.

    English.

    The young Lion shall overcome the old one,
    In Martial field by a single Duel,
    In a Golden Cage he shall put out his Eye,
    Two wounds from one, then he shall die a cruel death.

ANNOT.

This is one of the Prophecies that hath put our Author in credit, as well
for the clearness as for the true event of it.

Cæsar Nostradamus our Authors son, in his History of Provence,
writeth that by this Stanza his father intended to foretell the manner
of Henry the second’s death.

The French Histories relate that this great Prince desiring to honour
the Nuptial of his Daughter Elizabeth, married to Philip II. King of
Spain, did appoint a Tournament to be kept in St. Anthony’s street in
Paris, where himself would be one of the Defendants against all comers,
and for that purpose chose for his companions and associates Don Alfonso
d’Este Duke of Ferrara, and Francis of Lorrain, Duke of Guise.

The Tornament being almost ended, in which the King had shewed much
Valour being mounted upon a Horse of the Duke of Savoy, Philibert’s,
Emanuel his Brother in Law, this Duke intreated the King to leave off,
because he had got the Victory; and the weather was hot, and the night
drawing on: But this Martial King would need break one Launce more, and
commanded the Captain Gabriel de Lorges to be called, a young and
valiant Lord and Captain of the Scottish Guard. Being come, the King
commanded him to run against him, which he refused a great while; but the
King waxing angry, he obeyed, and set Spurs to his Horse, he did hit the
King in the lower part of his Beaver, the Launce was broken into shivers,
and the mean stump lifting up the Beaver, a splinter got in, and wounded
the King a little above the right Eye, where finding the Bone too hard,
it went very deep under the said Eye, and broke some Veins belonging to
the Membrane, called Pia Mater.

The blow was so violent that the King bended his head towards the lists,
and fell, into a Swound, being presently disarmed, they perceived the
splinter of the Launce in his Eye, and his face all bloody. He lived
ten days after, and died with great Convulsions, because the Sinews were
offended, whereupon he suffered grievous Torment.

His death was also foretold by Luke Gaurick a great Astrologer, who
being constrained by the Queen Catharine of Medicis, to tell her by
what kind of death her Husband should end his days, told her it should
be in a Duel, which made him to be hissed at, Kings being exempted of
those accidents.

According to this Narrative the Author calleth the King an old Lion,
and the Captain Lorges, since Earl of Montgomery, the young Lion;
because both fought like Lions. The young Lion overcame the old one
in Martial field, and in a fight of one against one, and consequently a
Duel.

He overcame him by putting his Eye out in a Golden Cage, that is, in
his Gilded Helmet.

Of which Wound there came another, because the blood of some broken
Veins, creeping into the Brains by the vehement agitation of the head,
caused an Impostume there, which could not be remedied: therefore the
Author saith two Wounds from one, that is, one wound made two: and the
King died of a cruel death, as we have said before.


XXXVI.

    French.

    Tard le Monarque se viendra repentir,
    De navoir mis a Mort son Adversaire,
    Mais viendra bien a plus haut consentir,
    Que tout son sang par Mort sera deffaire.

    English.

    The Monarque shall too late repent,
    That he hath not put to death his Adversary;
    But he shall give his consent to a greater thing than that,
    Which is to put to death all his Adversaries Kindred.

ANNOT.

The words of this are plain, though it be questionable whether the thing
is come to pass already, or not.


XXXVII.

    French.

    Un peu devant que le Soleil sabsconse,
    Conflict donné, grand peuple dubieux,
    Profligez, Port-Marin ne fait responce,
    Pont & Sepulchre en deux estranges lieux.

    English.

    A little before the Sun setteth,
    A Battle shall be given, a great people shall be doubtful,
    Of being foiled, the Sea-Port maketh no answer,
    A Bridge and Sepulchre shall be in two strange places.

ANNOT.

The two first verses I believe are concerning the Battle of Saint
Denis, which was fought in the Evening hard by Paris, and where the
Constable of Montmorency was kill’d, which made that great people of
Paris to be doubtful.

The other two Verses I leave to the interpretation of the Reader.


XXXVIII.

    French.

    Le Sol & l’Aigle Victeur paroistront,
    Response vain au vaincu lon asseure,
    Par Cor ne cris, harnois narresteront,
    Vindicte paix, par Mort lacheve a l’heure.

    English.

    The Sun and the Eagle shall appear to the Victorious,
    A vain Answer shall be made good to the vanquished,
    By no means Arms shall not be stopped,
    Vengeance maketh Peace, by death he then accomplisheth it.

ANNOT.

This Stanza being full of Figures and Equivoques, I will not interpose my
Judgement in it, lest I undertake too much, and perform too little.


XXXIX.

    French.

    De nuit dans le lit le supresme estranglé,
    Pour avoir trop suborné blond esleu,
    Par trois l’Empire subroge Exancle,
    A mort mettra, Carte ne Pacquet leu.

    English.

    By night in the bed the chief one shall be strangled.
    For having too much suborned fair Elect,
    By three the Empire subrogate Exancle,
    He shall put him to death, reading neither Card nor Packet.

ANNOT.

The Author hath purposely obscured this Prophecie in the third Verse,
to take away the Knowledge of it from the Reader; because the parties
concerned were then alive, viz. Philip II. King of Spain, who
caused his only son Don Carlo to be strangled in his bed, for suspicion
of being too familiar with his wife Elizabeth of France, and Daughter
to Henry II. The last Verse saith, that he was so implacable, that he
would read neither Card nor Packet, that is, no requests.


XL.

    French.

    La tourbe fausse dissimilant folie,
    Fera Bizance un changement de loix,
    Istra d’Ægypt qui veus que l’on deslie,
    Edict, changant Monnoys & alloys.

    English.

    The false Troup dissembling their folly,
    Shall make in Bizance an alteration of Laws.
    One shall come out of Ægypt who will have untied
    The Edict, changing the Coin and allay.

ANNOT.

There is two things in this Prognostication, the first that in Bizance,
which is Constantinople, a Troop of tumultuous persons gathered
together, and dissembling their folly, shall cause an alteration in the
Laws.

The other, that some Bassa come out of Ægypt, shall perswade them at
Constantinople to alter their Coin, and the allay of it.


XLI.

    French.

    Siege a Cité & de nuit assaille,
    Peu eschapez non loing de Mer conflict,
    Femme de joye, retour fils, de faillie,
    Poison & Lettres caché dedans le plie.

    English.

    A Siege laid to a City, and assaulted by night,
    Few escaped, a fight not far from the Sea,
    A woman swoundeth for joy to see her son returned;
    A poison hidden in the fold of Letters.

ANNOT.

After the taking of Vulpian, the French came to Montcalvo, and in
the night surprized it by Scalado, and Paradin saith, that not a drop
of Blood was shed on either side.

The Town being taken, the Citadel did hold out a good while, and at
last did surrender, Don Arbre, who was in the place of the Marques of
Pescaire, and of the Duke of d’Alva, knowing that the besieged had
not made a sufficient resistance, caused the Captain, and eleven more of
the chief ones to be hanged; because the place was of consequence, and
those within had not made a sufficient resistance.

The Author saith in the first Verse, Siege was laid to a City, that is,
it was resolved to besiege Montcalvo, as the Martial of Brissac had
advised. In the execution it was assaulted by night, in the taking few
escaped; for they were all taken, and yielded to the Victorious. There
were none killed or wounded, all were taken, except few who ran away, and
carried the news to the Spaniards.

At the same time a fight not far from the Sea, that is, at the same
time there was another Battle by the Sea, between the Spaniards and the
Pope, as we shall shew hereafter.

The third and fourth Verses are concerning a particular accident, which
happened presently after the taking of Montcalvo, which is, that a
woman seeing her Son come back safe, fell in a swound, or died for joy,
because knowing the danger wherein he was, she had lost all hopes of ever
seeing him. This fellow had brought Poison in a Letter to give to one
that had not rewarded him according to his desire. His wickedness being
discovered, his Master put him in Prison, whence he escaped, and came
back again to Montcalvo; the Author speaketh of the same in another
place, which we shall set down in its order.


XLII.

    French.

    Les dix Calendes d’Avril de fait Gothique,
    Resuscité encor par gens malins,
    Le feu estaint, assemblée Diabolique,
    Cherchant les Os de Damant & Psellin.

    English.

    The tenth of the Calends of April, Gothik account,
    Raised up again by malitious persons,
    The fire put out, a Diabolical assembly,
    Shall seek for the Bones of Damant and Psellin.

ANNOT.

The tenth of the Calends of April is the 23. of March, Gothik
account signifieth the old account of the Calendar, before the
reformation of it by Pope Gregory the XIII. which old account is called
here Gothik, because it is kept still by the Northern Nations, which do
not acknowledge the Pope, as Sweden, Denmark, Holland, England,
&c. at that time saith our Author, a Magician shall be raised up by
malitious persons; which fire or tumult being put out, that Diabolical
assembly will go about to seek the bones of two famous Magicians, viz.
Damant and Psellin that were dead before.


XLIII.

    French.

    Avant qu’aviene le changement d’Empire,
    Il adviendra un cas bien merveilleux,
    Le Champ mué, le Pilier de Porphyre,
    Mis, translaté sur le Rocher Noileux.

    English.

    Before the change of the Empire cometh,
    There shall happen a strange accident,
    A field shall be changed, and a Pillar of Prophyry,
    Shall be transported upon the Chalky Rock.

ANNOT.

This will not seem incredible to those that have read the English
Chronicles, who relates that in a County of England (I think it is
Herefordshire) there was an Earthquake, which transposed a large piece
of ground in another place, with the Trees that were in it, and if I
remember well, half a Chappel, those that have the Books may examine the
truth of the History, and satisfie themselves better.


XLIV.

    French.

    En bref seront de retour Sacrifices,
    Contrevenans seront mis a Martyre,
    Plus ne seront Moins, Abbez ne Novices,
    Le Miel sera beaucoup plus cher que Cire.

    English.

    Within a little while Sacrifices shall come again,
    Opposers shall be put to Martyrdom;
    There shall be no more Monks, Abbots, nor Novices,
    Honey shall be much dearer then Wax.

ANNOT.

This is a true Prophecy of the miserable condition of the Church and
Clergy in our Fore-fathers times, and chiefly of Henry the II. in
France, and Henry the VIII. in England, when in the beginning
of the Reformation there was such a confusion of opinions, and such
unsettledness in Ecclesiastical Government, that sometimes the Popish
party prevailed, and put to death the Opposers; at another time the
Protestants, who drove away the Monks, Abbots and Novices, as is
expressed here, and proved true in Henry the VIII. time. As for what he
saith, that Honey shall be much dearer than Wax. It is to be understood
of the downfal of the Romish Religion, who maketh use of Wax Candles and
Tapers in their superstitious ceremonies, as if he would say, that the
Romish Religion being down, Wax shall be cheap, and Honey dear.


XLV.

    French.

    Secteur de Sectes, grand paine au Delateur,
    Beste en Theatre, dresse le jeu Scenique,
    Du fait antique ennobly l’Inventeur,
    Par Sectes, Monde confus & Schismatique.

    English.

    Follower of Sects, great troubles to the Messenger,
    A Beast upon the Theatre prepareth the Scenical play,
    The Inventor of that wicked fact shall be famous,
    By Sects the World shall be confounded and Schismatik.

ANNOT.

The Author being a Papist, is probable that in this Prophecy he aimed
at Luther, after whose coming the world hath been full of Sects and
Schisms.


XLVI.

    French.

    Tout aupres d’Auch, de Lectoure & Mirande,
    Grand feu du Ciel en trois nuits tombera,
    Chose adviendra bien stupende & mirande,
    Bien peu apres la Terre tremblera.

    English.

    Near Auch, Lectoure and Mirande,
    A great fire from Heaven shall fall three nights together,
    A thing shall happen stupendious and wonderful,
    A little while after, the Earth shall quake.

ANNOT.

Auch, Lectoure and Miranda are three Towns in Guyenna, a Province
of France, the chief City whereof is Bourdeaux. The rest is easie.


XLVII.

    French.

    Du Lac Leman les Sermons fascheront,
    Des jours seront reduits par des Sepmaines,
    Puis mois, puis an, puis tous defalliront,
    Les Magistrats damneront leurs Loix vaines.

    English.

    The Sermons of the Leman Lake shall be troublesome,
    Some days shall be reduced into weeks,
    Then into months, then into year, then they shall fail,
    The Magistrates shall condemn their vain Laws.

ANNOT.

The Leman Lake, in Latin Lacus Lemanus, is the Lake of Geneva,
therefore it is palpable, that by this Prophecy, the Author aimeth at
Calvin, and his Successors, who began the Reformation in that Town. I
leave the rest to the Readers Judgement, it is enough I have opened the
door.


XLVIII.

    French.

    Vingt ans du Regne de la Lune passez,
    Sept mil ans autre tiendra sa Monarchie,
    Quand le Soleil prendra ses jours laissez,
    Lors accomplit & fine ma Prophecie.

    English.

    Twenty years of the Reign of the Moon being past,
    Seven thousands years another shall hold his Monarchy,
    When the Sun shall reassume his days past,
    Then is fulfilled, and endeth my Prophecy.

ANNOT.

All this signifieth no more, but that the Authors Prophecies extend to
the end of the world.


XLIX.

    French.

    Beaucoup, beaucoup avant relics menées,
    Ceux d’Orient par la vertu Lunaire,
    L’An mil sept cens feront grands emmenées,
    Subjugant presque le coin Aquilonaire.

    English.

    A great while before these doings,
    Those of the East by the virtue of the Moon,
    In the year 1700. shall carry away great droves,
    And shall subdue almost the whole Northern corner.

ANNOT.

I desire Posterity to take special notice of this Stanza, that in case
it should come to pass, our Author may be admired for the specification
of the time, which is so punctually set down, here that it admitteth no
ambiguity. The plain meaning is, that the Turks, which he calleth those
of the East. By the virtue of the Moon, which is their Ensign and Badge,
shall in the year 1700. carry away abundance of people, and shall subdue
almost the whole Northern Countrey, which to them is Russia, Poland,
Hungary, Sweden, Denemark, &c.


L.

    French.

    De l’Aquatique triplicity naistra,
    Un qui fera le Jeudy pour sa feste,
    Son Bruit, Loz, Regne & puissance croistra,
    Par Terre & Mer, aux Orients tempeste.

    English.

    From the Aquatick triplicity shall be born,
    One that shall make Thursday his Holiday,
    His Fame, Praise, Reign, and Power shall grow,
    By Land and Sea, and a Tempest to the East.

ANNOT.

The meaning is, that at that time, as such conjunction of Planets shall
be, which he calleth here Aquatick triplicity, there shall be born upon
a Thursday a famous man, such as he describeth here, who shall be a foe
and a terrour to the Turks, signified here by the Orients.


LI.

    French.

    Chef d’Aries, Jupiter & Saturne,
    Dieu Eternel quelles mutations!
    Puis apres long siecle son malin temps retourne,
    Gaule & Italy quelles emotions?

    English.

    Heads of Aries, Jupiter and Saturn,
    O Eternal God, what changes shall there be!
    After a long age his wicked time cometh again,
    France and Italy, what commotions?

ANNOT.

This signifieth, that when Jupiter and Saturn shall be in conjunction
in the head of Aries, that then shall be great commotions in France
and Italy.


LII.

    French.

    Le deux malins de Scorpion conjoint,
    Le grand Seigneur meurtry dedans sa salle,
    Peste a l’Eglise par le nouveau Roy joint,
    L’Europe basse, & Septentrionale.

    English.

    The two malignants of Scorpion being joyned,
    The grand Seignor murdered in his Hall,
    Plague to the Church by a King newly joyned to it,
    Europe low, and Septentrional.

ANNOT.

This third position of the Celestial bodies foretelleth the death of the
great Turk, who should be murdered in his own Chamber, as happened
to Sultan Osman, who was strangled in his Chamber, by the command of
Daout Bassa great Vizeir, about the year 1622. vide the Turkish
History.

The rest of the Prophecy is concerning a King, who being newly joyned to
the Church, (I suppose of Rome) shall bring much mischief to it, and in
his time Europe shall be brought very low, and in a manner confined to
a corner of the North, which hath relation to the foregoing 49. Stanza,
which see in its place.


LIII.

    French.

    Las, qu’on verra grand peuple tourmenté,
    Et la Loy Sainte en totale ruine,
    Par autres Loix toute la Chrestienté,
    Quand d’Or, d’Argent trouve nouvelle Mine.

    English.

    Alas, how a great people shall be tormented,
    And the Holy Law in an utter ruine;
    By other Laws, all Christendom troubled,
    When new Mines of Gold and Silver shall be found.

ANNOT.

This is a true Prophecy of the mischiefs that have happened in the
World by the finding of the Mines in America; first to the Indians
themselves, called here a great People, by the cruelty of the
Spaniards, and then to all Christendom besides, by the evils that this
Idol Mammon hath brought into it.


LIV.

    French.

    Deux revolts faits du malin facigere,
    De Regne & Siecles fait permutation,
    Le mobil signe a son endroit s’Ingere,
    Aux deux egaux & d’Inclination.

    English.

    Two revolts shall be made by the wicked Link-carrier,
    Which shall make a change of the Reign and the Age,
    The moveable Sign doth offer it self for it,
    To the two equals in inclination.

ANNOT.

This obscure Stanza must be interpreted thus.

Two revolts shall be made by the wicked Link-carrier; that is, Paris
which is the Link-carrier of France, and whose example the rest
of the Towns follow, shall revolt twice, the first revolt was against
Henry III. in the time of the Barricadoes, the second against Henry
IV. his successor.

Which shall make a change of the Reign and the Age: This happened when
the house of Valois was extinguished, and the house of Bourbon came
in, and that is the change of the Reign. The change of the Age, was,
because this did happen about the end of the year 1599. and the beginning
1600. which was a change of Age.

The moveable sign offers it self for it: That is, the position of the
Heavens was such as to forward these accidents.

To the two equals in ambition: That is, to Henry III. and Henry IV.
who both intended, and went about to reduce Paris to obedience.


LV.

    French.

    Soubs lopposite climat Babilonique,
    Grande sera de sang effusion,
    Que Terre, & Mer, Air, Ciel sera inique,
    Sectes, Faim, Regnes, Pestes, Confusion.

    English.

    In the Climat opposite to the Babylonian,
    There shall be a great effusion of Blood.
    Insomuch that the Land, and Sea, Air and Heaven shall seem unjust
    Sects, Famine, Reigns, Plague, Confusion.

ANNOT.

There is nothing difficult here, but what Climat is that is opposite
to the Babylonian, of which every body may satisfie himself by perusing
the Globe.


LVI.

    French.

    Vous verrez tost on tard faire grand change,
    Horreurs extremes & vindications,
    Que si la Lune conduite par son Ange,
    Le Ciel sapproche des inclinations.

    English.

    You shall see soon or late great alterations
    Extreme horrours and revenges,
    The Moon leaden by her Angel,
    The Heaven draweth near its inclinations.

ANNOT.

I conceive there is some things omitted, and corrupted by the Press in
this Stanza, which rendreth it so difficult, therefore I had rather leave
it to the decision of the impartial Reader, than venture my opinion upon
it.


LVII.

    French.

    Par grand discord la trombe tremblera,
    Accord rompu, dressant la teste au Ciel,
    Bouche sanglante dans le sang nagera,
    Au Sol la face ointe le loit & Miel.

    English.

    By great discord, the Trumpet shall sound,
    Agreement broken, lifting the head to Heaven,
    A bloody mouth shall swim in blood,
    The face turned to the Sun anointed with Milk and Honey.

ANNOT.

The words and sence are plain, and I cannot believe that there is any
great mystery hidden under these words.


LVIII.

    French.

    Trenché le ventre, naistra avec deux testes,
    & quattre bras, quel qu’ans entiers vivra,
    Jour qu’Aquilare celebrera ses festes,
    Fossan, Thurin, chef Ferrare fuiera.

    English.

    Slit in the belly, shall be born with two heads,
    And four Arms, it shall live some years,
    The day that Aquilare shall celebrate his Festivals,
    Fossan, Thurin, chief Ferrare shall run away.

ANNOT.

In the first Verse the Author speaketh of a Monster that had two heads,
and four Arms, and the Belly slit, that is to say, it was a female.

His Son Cæsar in his History of Provence, saith, that in the Town of
Senan in Provence, a Child was born with two heads, and that it was
foretold by some that were skilful in Astronomy, by which words I guess
he spake of his Father, sith the Astrologers cannot foretel the birth of
a particular Monster, and therefore Nostradamus only was able to do it
in those days.

He saith in the same place, that it was born in February 1554. and was
brought to Salon to be shewed to his Father, and thence was carried to
Claudius Earl of Savoy Governour of Provence, who commonly had his
residence at Salon.

He maketh no mention if he had four Arms, nor what Sex it was of, it may
be that being in swadling cloths, nobody took notice of the Arms or Sex.

The Author Prophecieth that it should live some years, it may be two or
three, and that is was preserved to see, whether in time it should have
the use of its Senses, of the Tongue, and understanding of its two Heads,
to see whether there were two Souls, or onely one, and to say the Truth.
I think that in such an accident both Heads ought to be Baptized, that
in case there should be two Souls, both should partake of the blood of
Christ, for their Eternal Salvation.

I do not find in the same History how long it lived, it being a thing not
much material to History. In the third Verse he marketh, The day that
Aquilare shall celebrate his Festivals; and in the fourth he saith
that Fossan, Thurin, chief Ferrare shall run away.

To understand this, one must suppose here that the Town of Cazal is
called here the chief of Ferrare; because it is the chief City of
Montserrat, and as Paradin saith, is called Cazal St. Bas, a
handsom and strong place, honoured with many Nobles and antient Families,
as of the Earls of St. George and of Biandratte.

Secondly, We must suppose that in the year 1554. the Lord Figuerol,
Lieutenant to the Governour of Milan did command in that place. Of
this Figuerol I find in the Author of the four Volumes of the States
and Empires, (when he speaketh of Spain) that the House of Figueroas
was the root of that of Aquilar, which hath several branches, out of
which came the Duke of Feria, and the Marquess of Pliego, so that
Figuerol and Aquilar is the same thing.

If it be objected that Figueroas and Figuerol are not the same,
Paradin teacheth us, that this Figuerol was bred up amongst the
Genoeses, and the corrupted Italian of Genoa may have named the
Captain Figuerol in stead of Figueroas.

Thirdly, We must suppose here that Cazal was taken in the night
that is between Shrove-Tuesday and Ash-Wednesday, and that from
Shrove-Sunday to that day there were great rejoycings, because of a
famous Marriage that was made between two persons of quality, where the
Lord Figuerol was one of the chief persons invited.

Fourthly, That these rejoycings were the occasion of the taking of
Cazal; because the Lord Salvaison Governour of Verrüe hearing of
this Feast, resolved to be among them, though with a different intention.
He had before hand made himself sure of one Fontarole, who under
pretence to sell fruit, went up and down the Town to spie what was a
doing.

Fifthly, The resolution of surprizing Cazal was agreed upon, and
the time appointed to be the night between Shrove-Tuesday and
Ash-Wednesday, when the Governour, Inhabitants and Souldiers should be
buried in sleep, weary of debaucheries committed the day before.

Sixthly, This resolution was so happily put into execution, that
Figuerol hearing the noise of the French being in Town, came out
of his house, having only his night Gown upon him, and a Halbert in his
hand, to quiet those whom he only thought to be some drunken persons;
but hearing the cry of France, France, he presently retired into the
Castle, with all those that were come to the Nuptials.

Seventhly, The Marshal of Brissac coming about seven of the Clock in
the Morning, caused the Tower of Cazal to be assaulted, which was taken
with a considerable loss of the French, and after that the Castle which
held out 12 days.

All this being supposed, mark what the Author saith in the third Verse.

The day that Aquilare shall celebrate his Festivals, that is, the day
that Figuerol of the house of Aquilare shall celebrate his Festivals,
not only one Festival, but his Festivals, that is of three days.

Fossen, Thurin, saith the fourth Verse, Chief Ferrare shall run
away.

Fossen, Thurin, doth not signifie two Towns, but one onely; for
although Fossen and Thurin be two Towns, of which Fossen in the
time of the Wars in Italy under Henry II. belonged to the Spaniard,
and Thurin to the French. These two Towns signifie but one, which is
that of Fossen, to which to distinguish it from Marseilles, he giveth
the Epithete of Thurin, so much as to say, that he speaketh of Fossen
a Town of Piemont, the chief Town of which is Thurin, and not of
Fossen, which the Author taketh often for Marseilles.

Which the Author maketh plain, when he saith in the singular number, that
Fossen, Thurin, chief Ferrare shall run away, to shew that it is onely
one Town of which he speaketh, otherwise if he had intended to speake of
two, he would have put it in the plural number, which is more manifest by
the History, wherein we learn that Fossen belonged to the Spaniards,
and Thurin to the French, and consequently, being of contrary
parties, they could neither follow, nor fly from a Town which belonged to
one of them.

If any one should object, that the sense of the fourth Verse is, that the
Chief Ferrare shall fly or follow these two Towns, the preceding reason
is repugnant to that sense; because a Town that is of one party, cannot
be friend to two Towns, one of which is of its party, and the other of
the contrary.

The reading of this work shall convince every body, that the Author
setteth down sometimes two Towns for one, to distinguish them from
others, as he nameth Paul Mansol, to distinguish that Town of St.
Paul, which is three Leagues from the Rhosne, over against Pont St.
Esprit, from that St. Paul which is in Provence.

Now that Fossen in Piemont shall run from Cazal the chief City of
Montserrat, because that being taken by the French, Fossen could
not expect but perpetual damages from it.

But why? will you say, doth the Author speak rather of Fossen, than of
other places that held for the Spaniards? I answer, because Fossen
was the strongest place that the Spaniards had in Piemont and which
could not be taken by the French, though her neighbour Saviliane was,
as we shall shew hereafter.

In the Vulgar impression of this Stanza, there is two faults, one is,
that in the first Verse it puts Aquileya, which is a Town that is not
in Italy, truth it is, that there is Aquilee a little above Venice,
but this hath no correspondency with Fossen, Thurin, nor the Chief
of Ferrara.

In the fourth Verse the impression setteth down shall follow, which
maketh nonsense, and therefore I put shall run away, which is a word in
French near the other, and maketh a compleat sense, to which agreeth
the birth of that Monster in February, and the taking of Cazal in the
Month of March. In that year, John Statius setteth Shrove-Tuesday
upon the 16 of February, and consequently we must say, that the Town
was not taken that year 1554. for the Citadel was taken 12 days after,
which should have been the 19 of February, and notwithstanding the
History marks that it was taken upon the 14 of March.

Therefore we must conclude, that it was taken the year following 1555.
and to say truth, in that year Ash-wednesday was the 27. of February;
in that day the Town was taken, and two days after the Tower of Cazal;
after which the Citadel was besieged the second of March, and the first
Saturday of Lent, and was taken twelve days after, which was the 14.
of March, which convinceth me that Cazal was taken in the year 1555.
upon the 27. of February, and therefore that this Stanza is wholly
Prophetical.


LIX.

    French.

    Les exilez deportez dans les Isles,
    Au changement d’un plus cruel Monarque,
    Seront meurtris & mis dans les Scintilles,
    Qui de parler ne seront este parques.

    English.

    They banished that were carried into the Islands,
    At the change of a more cruel Monarque,
    Shall be murdered, and put in the sparks of fire,
    Because they had not been sparing of their tongues.

ANNOT.

This is very plain, and signifieth no more, but that some persons that
were banished into Islands, and could not hold their tongues; upon the
coming of a Monarque, more cruel than his Predecessor, shall be murdered,
and burnt.


LX.

    French.

    Un Empereur naistra pres d’Italie,
    Qui a l’Empire sera vendu bien cher,
    Diront avec quels gens il se ralie,
    Qu’on trouvera moins Prince que Boucher.

    English.

    An Emperour shall be born near Italy,
    Who shall cost dear to the Empire,
    They shall say, what people he keepeth company!
    He shall be found less a Prince, than a Butcher.

ANNOT.

This Prophecy is for the future; for since Nostradamus’s time till now,
such an Emperour was not heard of, that was born near Italy, that cost
the Empire so dear, and proved more a Butcher, than a Prince.


LXI.

    French.

    La Republique miserable infelice,
    Sera vastée du nouveau Magistrat,
    Leur grand amas de l’exil malefice,
    Fera Suede ravir leur grand contract.

    English.

    The miserable and unhappy Common-wealth,
    Shall be wafted by the new Magistrate;
    Their great gathering from exiled persons,
    Shall cause Swedeland to break her Contract.

ANNOT.

The two first Verses foretell what hath happened to England under the
Government of a Common-wealth, and how their new Magistrate Cromwel
made a havock of them. The third and fourth Verses, mention what great
sums they exacted from those of the Kings party, and how for that cause
Swedeland foresook their friendship.


LXII.

    French.

    La grande perte las que feront les Lettres,
    Avant le Circle de Latona parfait,
    Feu, grand Deluge, plus par ignares Sceptres,
    Que de long siecle ne se verra refait.

    English.

    Alas what a great loss shall learning suffer,
    Before the Circle of the Moon be accomplished,
    Fire, great flood, and more by ignorant Scepters,
    Then can be made good again in a long age.

ANNOT.

Here the Author bemoaneth the loss of one eminent person in Learning,
be like of Julius Scaliger, who lived in his time, and was once his
intimate friend, the two last Verses that great miseries, as Fire and
Flood shall happen by the ignorance of Princes.


LXIII.

    French.

    Les Fleaux passez, diminué le Monde,
    Long temps la Paix, Terres inhabitées,
    Seur marchera par le Ciel, Terre, Mer & Onde,
    Puis de nouveau les Guerres suscitées.

    English.

    The Scourges being past, the World shall be diminished,
    Peace for a great while, Lands inhabited,
    Every one safe shall go by Heaven, Land and Sea,
    And then the Wars shall begin a fresh.

ANNOT.

This foretelleth a great tranquillity every where, and after that, Wars
again:


LXIV.

    French.

    De nuit Soleil penseront avoir veu,
    Quand le Pourceau demy homme on verra,
    Bruit, Chant, Bataille au Ciel battre apperceu,
    Et bestes brutes a parler on orra.

    English.

    They shall think to have seen the Sun in the night,
    When the Hog half a man shall be seen,
    Noise, Singing, Battles in Heaven shall be seen to fight,
    And brute beasts shall be heard to speak.

ANNOT.

This Stanza is full of prodigies that are to happen, and for that in the
last Verse, it is no great wonder, for many brute beasts have spoken,
speak now a days, and shall speak hereafter.


LXV.

    French.

    Enfant sans mains, jamais veu si grand Foudre,
    L’Enfant Royal au jeu d’esteuf blessé,
    Au puy brisez, fulgures allant moudre,
    Trois sur les champs par le milieu troussez.

    English.

    A child without hands, so great Lightning never seen,
    The Royal Child wounded at Tennis,
    Bruised at the Well, Lightnings, going to grind,
    Three shall be strucken by the middle.

ANNOT.

The meaning of all this is, that when a child shall be born without
hands, there shall be fearful Lightning; a Royal child shall be hurt at
Tennes, and by that Lightning some shall be bruised by a Well, and in a
Mill, and three in the Field shall be killed.


LXVI.

    French.

    Celuy qui lors portera les nouvelles,
    Apres un peu il viendra respirer,
    Viviers, Tournon, Montferrand & Pradelles,
    Gresle & tempeste les fera souspirer.

    English.

    He that then shall carry the news,
    A little while after shall draw his breath,
    Viviers, Tournon, Montferrant, and Pradelles,
    Hail and storm shall make them sigh.

ANNOT.

This Stanza hath a connexion with the foregoing, for the two first Verses
signifie, that he who shall carry the news of that fearful Lightning, and
of the mischief done by it, shall have much ado to recover his breath.

In the last two Verses, the Towns are named which shall suffer most by
that storm, and chiefly by the Hail and the Wind.


LXVII.

    French.

    La grand famine que je vois approcher,
    Souvent tourner puis estre universelle,
    Si grande & longue qu’on viendra arracher,
    Du Bois racine, & l’Enfant de mamelle.

    English.

    What a great famine do I see drawing near,
    To turn one way, then another, and then become universal,
    So great and long, that they shall come to pluck
    The root from the Wood, and the child from the breast.

ANNOT.

The words and sense of this are plain, and foretell a great famine, which
being first in one Countrey and then in another, shall at last become
general, and last so long, that people shall pluck the Roots from the
Trees, and the children from the breast to feed upon.


LXVIII.

    French.

    O quel horrible & malheureux tourment,
    Trois innocens qu’on viendra a livrer,
    Poison suspect, mal garde tradiment.
    Mis en horreur par Bourreaux enyvrez.

    English.

    O to what a horrid and unhappy torment
    Shall be put three Innocents!
    Poison shall be suspected, evil Keepers shall betray them,
    They shall be put to horrour by drunken Executioners.

ANNOT.

This is very plain concerning three innocent persons, who shall be
delivered up by their unfaithful keepers, and shall be put to great
torments by drunken Executioners, which torments shall be suspected to
come by poison.


LXIX.

    French.

    La grand Montagne ronde de sept Stades,
    Apres Paix, Guerre, Faim, Inondation,
    Roulera loing, abisuant grand contrades,
    Mesmes antiques, & grand Fondation.

    English.

    The great Mount in compass seven Stades,
    After Peace, War, Famine, and Innundation,
    Shall tumble a great way, sinking great Countries,
    Yea ancient Buildings, and great Foundation.

ANNOT.

A Stade cometh from the Greek word σταδιον, ἀπὸ τῆς στασεος, because
Hercules did overrun so much ground at one breath; but what space of
ground the Author meaneth by seven Stades, is unknown to me. The rest of
the Prophecy may very well be appropriated to the last fearful eruption
of Mount Ætna, which sunk so many Towns and Buildings, and the relation
of which is so handsomly and truly made by the most honourable the Earl
of Winchelsey, who was an eye witness to it, in his return from his
Embassy at Constantinople.


LXX.

    French.

    Pluye, Faim, Guerre en Perse non cessée,
    La foy trop grande trahira le Monarque;
    Par la finie en Gaule commencée,
    Secret augure pour a un estre parque.

    English.

    The Rain, Famine, War, in Persia being not ceased,
    Too great credulity shall betray the Monarque;
    Being ended there it shall begin in France,
    A secret Omen to one that he shall die.

ANNOT.

The meaning of the two first Verses, is, that while the Rain, Famine, and
War shall be in Persia, a Monarque shall be betrayed by his credulity.
The third Verse signifieth that this Rain, Famine and War being ended in
Persia, it shall begin in France. And the fourth Verse, that this
shall be an Omen to a great Person of his approaching death.


LXXI.

    French.

    La Tour Marine troisfois prise & reprise,
    Par Espagnols, Barbares, Ligurins,
    Marseille & Aix, Arles par ceux de Pise,
    Vast, feu, fer, pille, Avignon des Thurins.

    English.

    The Sea-tower three times taken and retaken,
    By Spaniards, Barbarians, and Ligurians,
    Marseilles and Aix, Arles by those of Pisa,
    Wast, fire, Iron, plunder, Avignon of Thurins.

ANNOT.

It is hard to guess what this Sea Tower is, which was taken and retaken
three times; first by the Spaniards, next by the Barbarians, and
then by the Ligurians, that is, either the Genoeses, or those of
Ligorne, unless he meaneth the Pignon de Velez in Africa, first
taken by Charles the V. upon the Barbarians, then retaken again by
them, taken again by the Spaniards, by the help of the Genoeses. In
the third Verse Marseille, Aix, and Arles, are threatned by those
of Pisa, that is the Florentines, of being ruinated by Fire and
Sword, and to be plundered, as also Avignon by those of Piemont.


LXXII.

    French.

    Du tout Marseille des habitans changee,
    Course & poursuite jusques pres de Lion,
    Narbon, Tholoze par Bourdeaux outragée,
    Tuez, Captifs presque d’un Milion.

    English.

    Marseille shall wholly change her Inhabitants
    These shall run and be pursued as far as Lion,
    Narbon, Tholoze shall wrong Bourdeaux,
    There shall be killed and taken prisoner almost a Milion.

ANNOT.

Marseilles is a Sea-Town in Provence, Narbon, and Tholoze are
Cities of Languedoc, and Bourdeaux is the chief Town in Gascony,
the rest is easie to be understood.


LXXIII.

    French.

    France a cinq parts par neglect assaillie,
    Tunis, Argier, esmeus par Persiens,
    Leon, Seville, Barcelonne faillie,
    N’aura la chasse par les Venetiens.

    English.

    France by a neglect shall be assaulted on five sides,
    Tunis, Argier shall be moved by the Persians,
    Leon, Sevil, Barcelone shall be missed,
    And not be pursued by the Venetians.

ANNOT.

This Stanza is concerning as many Countreys, as there are Verses:
the first is France, which by neglect and carelesness of her in
Inhabitants, shall be assaulted on five several sides. The second is
concerning Tunis and Argier, Cities of Barbary, which shall be
stirred and moved (I suppose) to rebel. The third regardeth Leon,
Sevil, Barselona, Cities in Spain, and the fourth the Venetians.


LXXIV.

    French.

    Apres sejourné vogueront en Empire,
    Le grand secours viendra vers Antioche,
    Le noir poil crespe tendra fort a l’Empire,
    Barbe d’Airain se rostira en broche.

    English.

    After a stay, they shall Sail towards an Empire,
    The great succours shall come towards Antioch,
    The Black Hair Curled, shall aim much to the Empire,
    The Brazen Beard shall be roasted on a Spit.

ANNOT.

There is no difficulty in this, but in the last Verse, which I had rather
leave to the judgment of the judicious Reader, than to offer any thing
that might make me ridiculous.


LXXV.

    French.

    Le Tyran Sienne occupera Savone,
    Le fort gaigné tiendra classe Marine,
    Les deux Armées par la marque d’Ancone,
    Par effrayeur le chef sen examine.

    English.

    The Tyrant Sienna shall occupy Savona;
    The Fort being won, shall hold a Fleet,
    The two Armies shall go in the mark of Ancona,
    By fear the chief shall be examined.

ANNOT.

For the explication of this Stanza, you must understand that Sienna is
a City in Italy, now under the Dominion of the Duke of Tuscany, who
shall occupy Savona, a City now under the Dominion of the Common-wealth
of Genoa; the rest is plain enough.


LXXVI.

    French.

    D’un nom farouche tel proferé sera.
    Que les trois Sœurs auront Fato le nom,
    Puis grand peuple par langue & fait dira,
    Plus que nul autre aura bruit & renom.

    English.

    By a wild name one shall be called
    So that the three Sisters shall have the name of Fato,
    Afterwards a great people by Tongue and Deeds, shall say,
    He shall have fame and renown more than any other.

ANNOT.

By the three Sisters, he meaneth the three Destinies, viz. Clotho,
Lachesis and Atropos, which the Poets have fained to Spin every mans
destiny, which he calleth here Fato, from the Latin word Fatum. The
rest may be interpreted as well by the Reader, as by my self.


LXXVII.

    French.

    Entre deux Mers dressera promontoire,
    Qui puis mourra par le mors du Cheval,
    Le fier Neptune pliera Voile noire,
    Par Calpre, & Classe aupres de Rocheval.

    English.

    Between two Seas shall a Promontory be raised,
    By him, who shall die by the biting of a Horse,
    The proud Neptune shall fold the black Sail.
    Through Calpre, and a fleet shall be near Rocheval.

ANNOT.

I could not find what he meaneth by Calpre, nor by Rocheval, which
I suppose to be the proper names of places, when he saith, that proud
Neptune shall fold the black Sail; he maketh an allusion to the History
of Theseus, Son of Ægeus King of Athens, who being sent with other
Children into Candia, to become a prey to the Minotaure, his Father
sent the Ship with black Sails, as in a case of Mourning, charging
Theseus, that if he came back again safe he should put on white Sails,
but coming in sight of Athens, Theseus for joy forgot to put on the
white Sails, so that his Father Ægeus thinking he had miscarried, cast
himself from a Rock into the Sea, so that he saying that Neptune shall
fold the black Sail, he meaneth, that there shall be joyful news.


LXXVIII.

    French.

    D’un chef vieillard naistre sens habeté,
    Degenerant par scavoir & par Armes,
    Le chef de France par sa Sœur redouté,
    Champs divisez concedez aux Gensdarmes.

    English.

    An old head shall beget an Idiot,
    Who shall degenerate in Learning and in Arms,
    The head of France shall be feared by his sister,
    The fields shall be divided and granted to the Troopers.

ANNOT.

The sense of this is so plain, that any body may make his interpretation
of it.


LXXIX.

    French.

    Bazas, L’Estoure, Condom, Auch, Agine,
    Esmeus par Loix, querelle & Monopole,
    Car Bourd, Tholose, Bay, mettra en ruine,
    Renouveler voulant leur Tauropole.

    English.

    Bazas, L’Estoure, Condom, Auch, Agen,
    Being moved by Laws, quarrels and Monopoly,
    For they shall put to ruine Bordeaux, Tholose, Bayonne,
    Going about to renew their Tauropole.

ANNOT.

This Key of the sense of this Stanza lieth in the last word Tauropole,
which is compounded of the Latin word Taurus a Bull, and of the Greek
word πολέω, that is, to sell; so that the meaning of it is, that those
Cities mentioned shall rise in Rebellion against the Monopolites, and
those that shall lay a Tax upon Cattle.


LXXX.

    French.

    De la sixiesme claire splendeur Celeste,
    Viendra Tonnerre si fort en la Bourgongne,
    Puis naistra monstre de treshideuse beste,
    Mars, Avril, May, Juin, grand charpin & rogne.

    English.

    From the sixth bright Cœlestial splendour,
    Shall come very great Lightning in Burgundy,
    After that shall be born a Monster of a most hideous beast,
    In March, April, May, June shall be great quarelling and
      muttering.

ANNOT.

The first Verse is of a most dark and abstruse sense, in which I confess
my ignorance, unless he meant from the sixth of the seven Planets, the
rest is plain enough.


LXXXI.

    French.

    D’humain troupeau neuf seront mis a part,
    De Jugement & Conseil separez,
    Leur sort sera divisé en depart,
    Kappa, Theta, Lambda, mors, bannis egarez.

    English.

    Nine shall be set aside from the human flock,
    Being divided in Judgement and Counsel
    Their fortune shall be to be divided,
    Kappa, Theta, Lambda, dead, banished, scattered.

ANNOT.

There is nothing difficult here, but what he meaneth by Kappa, Theta,
Lambda, which are three Letters of the Greek Alphabet.


LXXXII.

    French.

    Quand les Colomnes de Bois grande tremblée,
    D’Auster conduite, couverte de rubriche,
    Tant videra dehors grande assemblée,
    Tremble Vienne, & le Païs d’Austriche.

    English.

    When the wooden Columns shall be much shaken,
    By Auster, and covered with rubbish,
    Then shall go out a great assembly,
    And Vienne, and the Land of Austria shall tremble.

ANNOT.

Auster, in Latin is the Southwind. Vienna is the chief City of
Austria, belonging to the Emperour of Germany.


LXXXIII.

    French.

    L’Agent estrange divisera butins,
    Saturne & Mars son regard furieux,
    Horrible, estrange, aux Thoscans & Latins,
    Grees qui seront a frapper curiux.

    English.

    The stranger Agent shall divide booties,
    Saturn in Mars shall have his aspect furious,
    Horrid, and strange to the Tuscans and Latines,
    The Grecians shall be curious to strike.

ANNOT.

By the Tuscans are meant the people under the Dominion of the Duke of
Florence; and by the Latines, those under the Pope.


LXXXIV.

    French.

    Lune obscurie aux profondes tenebres,
    Son frere passe de couleur ferrugine,
    Le grand caché long temps soubs les tenebres,
    Tiedera Fer dans la Pluie sanguine.

    English.

    The Moon shall be darkned in the deepest darkness,
    Her brother shall pass being of a ferrugineous colour,
    The great one long hidden under darkness,
    Shall make his Iron lukewarm in the bloody Rain.

ANNOT.

This signifieth, that when the Moon shall be totally Eclipsed in the
night, and that all the next day her Brother the Sun shall be seen of a
ferrugineous, (that is an Iron like colour) then shall a great one that
was hidden arise, and do great feats of Arms with the death of many men.


LXXXV.

    French.

    Par la responce de Dame Roy troublé,
    Ambassadeurs mespriseront leur vie,
    Le grand ses Freres contrefera doublé,
    Par deux mourront, hain, ire, & envie.

    English.

    A King shall be troubled by the answer of a Lady,
    Embassadors shall despise their lives,
    The great one being double in mind shall counterfeit his Brothers,
    They shall die by two, anger, hatred, and envy.

ANNOT.

There is nothing difficult here, but the last Verse, which yet will be
plain enough, if you make these three words anger, hatred, and envy not
co-herent with the foremost, but subsisting by themselves; as if one
should say, there shall be anger, hatred, and envy.


LXXXVI.

    French.

    La grande Roine quand se verra vaincue,
    Fera exces de Masculin courage,
    Sur le Cheval, Fleuve passera nue,
    Suite par Fer, a Foy fera outrage.

    English.

    When the great Queen shall see her self vanquished,
    She shall do a deed of a Masculine courage,
    Upon a Horse, she shall pass over the River naked,
    Followed by Iron, she shall do wrong to her Faith.

ANNOT.

It is some great Queen, who seeing her self vanquished, shall swim naked
on Horseback over a River, being followed by those that would have either
killed or taken her, and after that shall forfeit her faith, but whether
it be to her Husband, Friends, or Relations, is not expressed.


LXXXVII.

    French.

    Ennosigee feu du Centre de Terre
    Fera trembler autour de Cité Neuve,
    Deux grands Rochers long temps feront la guerre,
    Puis Arethuse rougira nouveau fleuve.

    English.

    Ennosigee, fire of the Center of the Earth,
    Shall make quake about the New City,
    Two great Rocks shall a great while War one against the other,
    After that, Arethusa shall colour red a new River.

ANNOT.

Ennosigee is a Greek word εννοσίγαιος, in Latin Terræ quassator, from
ἔνίω moveo, and γαῖα Terra, and is an Epithete of Neptune. The
meaning then of this Stanza is, that the Sea shall make the Earth quake,
and fire come out of the Earth about Naples, which in Greek is called
Neapolis, that is, a New City.

Arethusa is a Fountain in Sicily, which a little way from its Spring,
groweth into a River. The rest is left to the interpretation of the
Reader.


LXXXVIII.

    French.

    Le Divin mal surprendra un grand Prince,
    Un peu devant aura femme espousée,
    Son appuy & credit a un coup viendra mince,
    Conseil mourra pour la teste rasée.

    English.

    The Divine sickness shall surprise a great Prince,
    A little while after he hath married a woman,
    His support and credit shall at once become slender,
    Council shall die for the shaven head.

ANNOT.

By the Divine sickness, he meaneth the falling sickness, called by the
Greeks Epilepsia, and by the Latines Morbus Sacer. By the shaven
head, he meaneth some Ecclesiastical person of the Romish Religion; the
construction of the whole is easie.


LXXXIX.

    French.

    Tous ceux d’Illerde seront dans la Moselle,
    Mettant a mort tous ceux de Loire & Seine,
    Le course Marin viendra pres d’Hautevelle,
    Quand Espagnols ouvrira toute veine.

    English.

    All those of Illerde shall be in the Mosel,
    Putting to death all those of Loire and Seine,
    The Sea course shall come near Hautevelle,
    When the Spaniard shall open all veins.

ANNOT.

By Illerde he meaneth the City of l’Isle in Flanders, the Mosel
is a River that runneth through Lorrain, the Loire and Seine are
two other Rivers of France, the first of which passeth at Orleans,
and the second at Paris; the two last Verses are too hard for me to
interpret.


XC.

    French.

    Bourdeaux, Poitiers, au son de la Campane,
    A grande classe ira jusqu’a Langon,
    Contre Gaulois sera leur Tramontane,
    Quand Monstre hideux naistra pres de Orgon.

    English.

    Bourdeaux, Poitiers, at the sound of the Bell,
    With a great Navy shall go as far as Langon,
    Against the French shall their Tramontane be,
    When an hideous Monster shall be born near Orgon.

ANNOT.

Tramontana, in Italian, is the North-wind. Orgon, is the name of a
Town in Gascony, the rest of the construction is not difficult.


XCI.

    French.

    Les dieux feront aux humains apparence,
    Ce quils seront auteurs de grand conflict,
    Avant ciel veu serain, Espée & Lance,
    Que vers main gauche sera plus grande affliction.

    English.

    The Gods shall make it appear to Man-kind,
    That they are the Authors of a great War;
    For the Heaven that was Serene, shall shew Sword and Lance,
    Signifying, that on the left hand the affliction shall be greater.

ANNOT.

He foretelleth here some Prodigies that shall be in the Air, as Swords
and Lances after fair weather, which shall be forerunners of great
Wars, and chiefly in those Countries that shall be situated on the left
hand of these Prodigies.


XCII.

    French.

    Soubs un la paix, par tout sera clemence,
    Mais non long temps, pille & rebellion,
    Par refus Ville, Terre & Mer entamée,
    Morts & Captifs le liers d’un Million.

    English.

    Under one shall be peace, and every where clemency,
    But not a long while, then shall be plundering and Rebellion,
    By a denyal shall Town, Land and Sea be assaulted,
    There shall be Dead and taken Prisoners the third part of a Million.

ANNOT.

The words and sense are plain.


XCIII.

    French.

    Terre Italique des Mons tremblera,
    Lion & Coq non trop confederez,
    en lieu & peur l’un l’autre saidera,
    Seul Catulon & Celtes moderez.

    English.

    The Italian Land of the Mountains shall tremble,
    The Lion and the Cock shall not agree very well together,
    Shall for fear help one another,
    The only Catulon and Celtes shall be moderate.

ANNOT.

By the Lion he understandeth the English, because of their Arms, and
by the Cock the French, called in Latin Gallus, which signifieth a
Cock; Catulon is the Spaniards, as if he should say Castilian; the
Celtes are the Dutch of the Low-Countries.


XCIV.

    French.

    Au Port Selyn le Tyrant mis a Mort,
    La liberté non pourtant recouvrée,
    Le nouveau Mars par vindict & remort,
    Dame par force de frayeur honorée.

    English.

    In the Port Selyn the Tyrant shall be put to death
    And yet the liberty shall not be recovered,
    The new Mars by vengeance and remorse,
    Lady by excess of fear honoured.

ANNOT.

By the Port Selyn, is meant Constantinople, because of several
Emperours of the Turks that have been of that name, therefore the
intention of this Prophecy, is, that one of the Turkish Emperours shall
be put to death at Constantinople, which for all that, shall not
recover her liberty. The new Mars, be like he is so called, that shall
put him to death by vengeance without remorse. The Lady by excess of
fear honoured, may be applied to the present great Sultaness, Mother to
this present Emperour of the Turks, who hath hitherto made her self
very considerable by a great party, which she hath raised against her
Son, to prevent him from putting his Brothers to death, as is usually
practised in that Court.


XCV.

    French.

    Devant Moustier trouvé enfant besson,
    D’Heroik sang de Moine & vetustique,
    Son bruit per Secte, Langue, & puissance Son,
    Qu’on dira fort eslevé le Vopisque.

    English.

    Before the Minster shall one twin be found,
    From Heroik blood, of a Monk and Ancient,
    His fame by Sect, Tongue, and Power shall be sounded,
    So that they shall say the Vopisk is much raised.

ANNOT.

The meaning of the whole is, that a Twin shall be found before a Church,
begot by a Monk, of Illustrious and Ancient Family, and shall become very
famous, So that they shall say the Vopisk is much raised. Vopiscus in
Latin, is, that one of the Twins, which cometh to perfect Birth.


XCVI.

    French.

    Celuy qu’aura la charge de destruire,
    Temples & Sectes changez par fantaisie,
    Plus aux Rochers, qu’aux vivans viendra nuire,
    Par langue ornée d’oreille rassasie.

    English.

    He that shall have charge to destroy,
    Churches and Sects, changed by fancy;
    Shall do more harm to the Rocks, than to the living,
    By a smooth tongue filling up the Ears.

ANNOT.

As the words of this Stanza are plain, so is the sense most obscure, and
so to be left to the Readers private Judgement.


XCVII.

    French.

    Ce que fer, flamme, na sceu parachever,
    La douce langue au conseil viendra faire,
    Par respos, songe le Roy fera resuer,
    Plus l’Ennemy en feu sang militaire.

    English.

    What neither Iron nor Fire could compass,
    Shall be done by a smooth tongue in the Councel,
    In sleep a dream shall make the King to think,
    The more the Enemy in fire and Military blood.

ANNOT.

The sense of this is plain, though the words be somthing untowardly
expressed.


XCVIII.

    French.

    Le Chef qu’aura conduit peuple infiny,
    Loin de son Ciel: de mœurs & langue estrange,
    Cinq mille en Crete & Thessalie finy,
    Le Chef fuiant sauvé en la Marine Grange.

    English.

    The Captain that shall lead an infinite deal of people
    Far from their Countrey, to one of strange manners and Language,
    Five thousand in Candia and Thessalia finished,
    The Head running away, shall be safe in a Barn by the Sea.

ANNOT.

It is some great Commander that shall lead a multitude of people into a
strange Countrey, far from their own; suppose Candia and Thessalia,
where the said Commander shall be compelled to run away, and to save
himself in a Barn by the Sea side.


XCIX.

    French.

    Le grand Monarque qui fera compagnie,
    Avec deux Rois unis par amitié,
    O quel souspir fera la grand mesgnie,
    Enfans, Narbonne alentour, quel pitié!

    English.

    The great Monarch shall keep company,
    With two Kings united in friendship;
    O what fights shall be made by their followers!
    Children, O what pity shall be about Narbon.

ANNOT.

This Stanza requireth no interpretation more, than what every one will be
pleased to give himself.


C.

    French.

    Long temps au Ciel sera veu gris Oiseau,
    Aupres de Dole & de Tuscane Terre,
    Tenant au Bec un verdoiant rameau,
    Mourra tost Grand, & finira la Guerre.

    English.

    A great while shall be seen in the Air a gray Bird,
    Near Dola and the Tuscan Land,
    Holding in his Bill a green bough;
    Then shall a great one die, and the War have and end.

ANNOT.

Dola is a Town in Burgundy. The Tuscan Land, is that which
belongeth to the Duke of Florence.




THE PROPHECIES OF Michael Nostradamus.

CENTURY II.


I.

    French.

    Vers Aquitaine par insults Britanniques,
    De par eux mesmes grandes incursions,
    Pluyes, Gelees, feront terroirs iniques,
    Port Selyn fortes fera invasions.

    English.

    Towards Gascony by English assaults,
    By the same shall be made great incursions,
    Rains, Frosts, shall marre the ground.
    Port Selyn shall make strong Invasions.

ANNOT.

Three Prophecies are contained in this Stanza, the first that the
English shall make an incursion in Gascony; the second, that there
shall be a great dearth by Rains and Frosts; the third, that the Turks
shall make great Incursion.


II.

    French.

    La teste glue sera la teste blanche,
    Autant de mal que France a fait leur bien,
    Mort a l’Anthene, grand pendu fus la branche,
    Quand prins des siens, le Roy dira combien.

    English.

    The Glue-head shall do the white head
    As much harm, as France hath done it good,
    Dead at the Sails yard, a great one hang’d on a Tree,
    When a King taken by his own, shall say, how much?

ANNOT.

I did never find that word of Glue-head before in any Author, and I
believe if Cotgrave were alive again, it would puzzle him to give the
interpretation thereof.

The third and fourth signifie, that one shall be hanged on the
Sails-yard, and another on a Tree, when a King shall be taken by his own
Men, and shall say how much? that is, how much money shall I give you to
set me free.


III.

    French.

    Par la chaleur Solaire sur la Mer,
    De Negrepont, les Poissons demy cuits,
    Les Habitans les viendront entamer,
    Quand Rhode & Genes leur faudra le Biscuit.

    English.

    By the heat of the Sun upon the Sea
    Of Negrepont, the Fishes shall be half broiled,
    The Inhabitants shall come to cut them up,
    When Rhodes and Genoa shall want Biscake.

ANNOT.

Negrepont is an Island of the Archipelago near Morea, anciently
called Eubœa. Rhodes is another Island, and, Genoa a City in
Italy, by the Seaside. The rest is plain.


IV.

    French.

    Depuis Monac jusqu’aupres de Sicile,
    Toute la plage demoura desolée,
    Il ny aura Fauxbourgs, Cité, ne Ville,
    Que par Barbares pillée soit & volée.

    English.

    From Monaco as far as Sicily,
    All the Sea coast shall be left desolate,
    There shall not be Suburbs, Cities, nor Towns,
    Which shall not be pillaged and plundred by Barbarians.

ANNOT.

Monaco is a Town seated by the Sea-side in Italy, between Provence
and Genoa. This Prophecy hath been once already fulfilled, when the
famous Pyrate Barbarossa, being sent by the grand Seignor, to help the
French King against the Emperour Charles the V. in his return home,
plundered all that Coast, and carried away an innumerable multitude of
people into slavery.


V.

    French.

    Quand dans Poisson, Fer & Lettre enfermée,
    Hors sortira qui puis fera la Guerre,
    Aura par Mer sa classe bien ramée;
    Aparoissant pres de Latine Terre.

    English.

    When in a Fish, Iron and a Letter shall be shut up,
    He shall go out that afterwards shall make War,
    He shall have his Fleet by Sea well provided,
    Appearing by the Roman Land.

ANNOT.

The words and the sense are plain.


VI.

    French.

    Aupres des Portes & dedans deux Citez,
    Seront deux Fleaux & onc n’aperceu un tel,
    Faim, dedans Peste, de Fer hors gens boutez,
    Crier secours au grand Dieu immortel.

    English.

    Near the Gates and within two Cities
    Shall be two Scourges, I never saw the like,
    Famine, within Plague, people thrust out by the Sword,
    Shall cry for help to the great God immortal.

ANNOT.

This needeth no Interpretation.


VII.

    French.

    Entre plusieurs aux Isles deportez,
    L’un estre nay a deux dens en la gorge,
    Mourront de Faim, les Arbres esbroutez,
    Pour eux neuf Roy, nouvel Edict leur forge.

    English.

    Among many that shall be transported into the Islands,
    One shall be born with two Teeth in his mouth,
    They shall die of hunger, the Trees shall be eaten,
    They shall have a new King, who shall make new Laws for them.

ANNOT.

This is so plain, that it needeth no explication.


VIII.

    French.

    Temples Sacrez, prime facon Romaine,
    Rejetteront les goffes Fondemens,
    Prenant leurs Loix premieres & humaines,
    Chassants non tout, de Saints le cultement.

    English.

    Churches Consecrated, and the ancient Roman way,
    Shall reject the tottering Foundations,
    Sticking to their first humane Laws,
    Expelling, but not altogether the worshipping of Saints.

ANNOT.

This Prophecy, is concerning the beginning of the Reformed Religion, when
the Roman Church rejected it, yet nevertheless, for shame they left
off many of their fopperies, for ever since they never appeared so great
Worshippers of Saints as before.


IX.

    French.

    Neuf ans le Regne le maigre en paix tiendra,
    Puis il cherra en soif si sanguinaire,
    Pour luy grand peuple sans Foy & Loy mourra,
    Tué par un beaucoup plus debonaire.

    English.

    Nine years shall the lean one keep the Kingdom in Peace,
    Then he will fall into such a bloody thirst,
    That a great people shall die without Faith or Law,
    He shall be killed by one milder than himself.

ANNOT.

It is a lean man that shall keep in Peace the Kingdom, for the space of
nine years, and then shall become cruel; so that he shall put to death
many people without Law, or regard of his promise.


X.

    French.

    Avant long temps le tout sera rangé,
    Nous esperons un siecle bien senestre,
    L’Estat des masques & des seuls bien changé,
    Peu trouveront qui a son rang vueille estre.

    English.

    Before it be long, all shall be set in order,
    We look for a sinister Age,
    The state of the Visards and of the alone shall be changed,
    They shall find few that will keep their ranks.

ANNOT.

All the difficulty of this consisteth in what he meaneth by the Visard
and alone, for my part, I believe he aimeth at the Popish Clergy and
Monks; the first by reason of their Hypocrisy, the other by reason of
their solitariness. The rest is plain.


XI.

    French.

    Le prochain, fils de l’Aisnier parviendra,
    Tant eslevé jusqu’au au Regne des fors,
    Son aspre gloire un chascun la craindra,
    Mais les enfans du Regne jettez hors.

    English.

    The eldest Son of l’Aisnier shall prosper,
    Being raised to the degree of the great ones,
    Every one shall fear his high glory,
    But his children shall be cast out.

ANNOT.

This is an Horoscope, for the Interpretation of which we are beholding
to, Mr. Mannessier of Amiens, who saith that the Father of the Lords
l’Aisniers writ to Nostradamus his friend, to know his childrens
fortune, who sent him those four Verses for an answer, by which it is
evident that the eldest should be an eminent Man, as it fell out, being
one of the chiefest men in the Province of Anjou, and one of the
chiefest instruments to make Peace between Louis the XIII. and his
Mother Mary of Medicis, after the Battle of Pont de Cé.

The fourth Verse saith, that some of his other Children should be
expelled the Kingdom, as it happened by reason of a false report raised
against one of them, which compelled him to retire into Portugal till
the truth was known, as it was afterwards to his great repute and honour.


XII.

    French.

    Yeux clos ouverts d’antique fantaisie,
    L’habit des seuls sera mis a neant,
    Le grand Monarque chastiera leur frenesie,
    Ravir des Temples le Thresor par devant.

    English.

    Eyes shut, shall be open by an antick fancy,
    The cloths of the alone shall be brought to nothing.
    The great Monarck shall punish their frenzy,
    For having ravished the Treasure of the Temple before.

ANNOT.

I can fasten this upon no body, but upon some Monks, which are called
here The alone, because of their solitary life, who shall be punished
by a King, for having robbed the Church.


XIII.

    French.

    Le corps sans ame plus n’estre en sacrifice,
    Jour de la mort mis en Nativité.
    L’Esprit Divin sera l’ame fœlice,
    Voiant le Verbe en son Eternité.

    English.

    The body without the soul shall be no more admitted in Sacrifice,
    The day of the death shall be put for the Birth-day,
    The Divine Spirit shall make the Soul happy,
    By seeing the Word in its Eternity.

ANNOT.

The first Verse seemed to Prophecy the Reformation of Religion, and the
change of opinion concerning the Lords Supper, which should be no more
a Sacrifice (as the Roman Church calleth the Mass) of a body without
a soul, but only a commemoration of the Lords death, as the second
Verse confirmeth, saying, The day of the death shall be put for the
Birth-day, seeing, that by the commemoration of that death, we are
renewed into a newness of life, and as it were born again. The last two
Verse are easie.


XIV.

    French.

    A Tours, Gien, Gergeau, seront yeux penetrans,
    Descouvriront le long de la grande Sereine,
    Elle & sa Suite au Port seront entrans,
    Combat poussez Puissance Souveraine.

    English.

    At Tours, Gien, Gergeau, shall be piercing eyes,
    Who shall discover along the great Syren,
    She and her Attendans shall enter into the Port,
    By a fight shall be thrust out the Soveraign Power.

ANNOT.

Tours, Gien, and Gergeau are Cities upon the River of Loire,
which is called here the great Syren, because of the length of its
course, the meaning then is, that those Cities shall be watchful, and
stand upon their guard, and shall fight against a King, which if it hath
already come to pass in the Civil Wars, or shall happen hereafter, I
cannot affirm.


XV.

    French.

    Un peu devant Monarque trucidé,
    Castor, Pollux, en nef astre crinite,
    L’Airain public, par Terre & Mer vuidé,
    Pisa, Ast, Ferrare, Turin Terre interdite.

    English.

    A little before a Monarch be killed
    Castor, and Pollux shall appear, and a Comet in the Ship;
    The publick brass, by Land and Sea shall be emptyed,
    Pisa, Ast, Ferrare, Turin, Countreys forbidden.

ANNOT.

The meaning of this is, that a little before a Monarck be killed,
Castor and Pollux two Meteores so called, as also a Comet in that
constellation of the Heavens, called the ship of Argos, and the
Publick Brass, that is, the Canons by Land and Sea shall be emptied, and
these Towns of Italy, viz. Pisa, Ast, Ferrare, Turin, shall be
excommunicated by the Pope.


XVI.

    French.

    Naples, Palerme, Sicile, Syracuse,
    Nouveaux Tyrants, fulgures, feu Cœlestes,
    Force de Londres, Gand, Bruxelles, & Suse,
    Grand Hecatombe, Triomphe, faire Festes.

    English.

    Naples, Palermo, Sicily, Syracusa,
    New Tyrants, Lightnings, Celestial fires,
    Army from London, Ghent, Bruxelles, and Suse,
    A great Hecatomb, Triumphs, and Feasts.

ANNOT.

There is nothing difficult but the word Hecatomb, which is a Greek
word, signifying a Sacrifice of an hundred Oxen.


XVII.

    French.

    Le Camp du Temple de la Vierge Vestale,
    Non esloigné d’Ethene & Monts Pyrenées,
    Le grand conduit est chassé dans la Male,
    North gettez Fleuves, & Vignes mastinées.

    English.

    The Camp of the Temple of the Vestal Virgin,
    Not far from Ethene and the Pyrenean Mountains,
    The great Conduit is driven in the Clock-bag,
    Rivers overflown in the North, and the Vines spoiled.

ANNOT.

There is so many faults in the impression of this, and so hard to be
rectified, that I had rather leave it to the liberty of the judicious
Reader, then make my self ridiculous in not giving him satisfaction.


XVIII.

    French.

    Nouvelle Pluie, subite, impetueuse,
    Empeschera subit deux excercites,
    Pierre, Ciel, Feux, faire la Mer pierreuse,
    La mort de sept, Terre & Marin subites.

    English.

    A new Rain, sudden, impetuous,
    Shall suddenly hinder two Armies,
    Stone, Heaven, Fire, shall make the Sea stony,
    The death of seven shall be sudden upon Land and Sea.

ANNOT.

The first two Verses signifie, that a sudden and impetuous Rain shall
hinder two Armies from fighting.

The two last Verses foretell several Prodigies, the which happening,
seven persons shall suddenly die upon the Sea and Land.


XIX.

    French.

    Nouveaux venus, lieu basty sans defence,
    Occuper place pour lors inhabitable,
    Prez, Maisons, Champs, Villes prendre a plaisance,
    Faim, Peste, Guerre, arpent long labourable.

    English.

    New comers shall build a place without fence,
    And shall occupy a place that was not then habitable,
    They shall at their pleasure take Fields, Houses and Towns.
    There shall be Famine, Plague, War, and a long arable field.

ANNOT.

This is so plain, that it needeth no Interpretation.


XX.

    French.

    Freres & Sœurs en divers lieux captifs,
    Se trouveront passer pres du Monarque,
    Les contempler ses deux yeux ententifs,
    Des plaisant vont, Menton, Front, Nez les marques.

    English.

    Brothers and Sisters shall be made slaves in divers places,
    And shall pass before the Monarck,
    Who shall look upon them with attentive eyes,
    They shall go in heaviness, witness their Chin, Forehead and Nose.

ANNOT.

This is obvious to the meanest capacity.


XXI.

    French.

    L’Ambassadeur envoié par Biremes,
    A my chemin incogneus repoulsez,
    De Sel renfort viendront quatre triremes,
    Cordes & Chaines en Negrepont troussez.

    English.

    The Embassadour that was sent in Biremes,
    In the midleway shall be repulsed by unknown Men,
    From the Salt to his succours shall come four triremes,
    Ropes and Chains shall be carried to Negrepont.

ANNOT.

Bireme is a Galley that hath two ranges of Oares, Trireme is one
that hath three ranges. The meaning then of this is, that an Embassadour
shall be sent in a Galley with two ranges of Oares, and that he shall be
met in his way by unknown men, that is, Pyrates; there shall come to his
succours from the Salt, that is, from the French four Triremes,
that is four Galleys, every one having three ranges of Oares, but they
shall all be carried to Negrepont, an Island belonging to the Turk.


XXII.

    French.

    Le Camp Ascop d’Europe partira,
    Sadioignant proche de l’Isle submergée,
    D’Arton classe Phalange partira,
    Nombril du Monde plus grand voix subrogée.

    English.

    The Camp Ascop shall go from Europe,
    And shall come near the drowned Island;
    From Arton shall go an Army by Sea and Land,
    By the Navel of the World a greater vice shall be substituted.

ANNOT.

The Author hath darkned this Stanza with so many barbarous words, as
Camp Ascop, drowned Island, D’Arton, Navel of the World, that
it is very like either he did not understand himself, or would not be
understood by others.


XXIII.

    French.

    Palaces Oiseaux, par Oiseau dechassé,
    Bien tost apres le Prince parvenu,
    Combien qu’hors Fleuve ennemy repoulsé,
    Dehors saisy, trait d’Oiseau soustenu.

    English.

    Palais Birds, driven away by a Bird,
    Soon after that, the Prince is come to his own,
    Although the enemy be driven beyond the River,
    He shall be seased upon without, by the trick of the Bird.

ANNOT.

The meaning of this is, that many Courtiers (called here Palace Birds)
shall be justled out of favour by another principal Bird, that is a great
Courtier, as soon as the Prince shall come to his own.

The two last Verses seem to foretell that the said principal Courtier
shall seize upon the Prince, notwithstanding that some succour shall come
to his help, which shall be beaten back beyond the River.


XXIV.

    French.

    Bestes farouches de faim Fleuves traner,
    Plus part du Champ encontre Ister sera,
    En Cage de Fer le grand fera traisner.
    Quand rien enfant de Germain n’observera.

    English.

    Wild Beasts for hunger shall swim over Rivers,
    Most part of the field shall be near Ister,
    Into an Iron Cage he shall cause the great one to be drawn,
    When the Child of German shall observe nothing.

ANNOT.

Ister is a River, German is a proper name of some considerable
person, whose Son shall not observe or take notice when that eminent
person mentioned here, shall be drawn into an Iron Cage.


XXV.

    French.

    La Garde estrange trahira Forteresse,
    Espoir & umbre de plus haut mariage,
    Garde deceüe Fort prins dedans la presse,
    Loire, Saone, Rhosne, Gar, a Mort outrage.

    English.

    The Garrison of strangers shall betray the Fort,
    Under the hope and shadow of a higher Match,
    The Garrison shall be deceived, and the Fort taken in the crowd,
    Loire, Saone, Rhosne, Gar, shall do harm to Death.

ANNOT.

There is no difficulty but in the last Verse, where you must observe that
Loire, Saone, Rhosne, and Gardon, which for the Verses sake is
contracted into Gar; are Rivers of France, which are threatned here
of overflowing, and causing the death of many people.


XXVI.

    French.

    Pour la faveur que la Cité fera,
    Au grand qui tost perdra Camp de Bataille,
    Le sang d’ans Pau le Thesin versera,
    De sang feux, mors, noyez de coup de taille.

    English.

    Because of the favour the City shall shew,
    To the great one, who soon after shall loose the Battle,
    The Thesin shall pour blood into the Pau,
    Of blood, fire, dead, drowned, by Edgeling.

ANNOT.

This is plain, if you observe that the Thesin is a River of Italy,
and the Pau another, into the which the Thesin runneth.


XXVII.

    French.

    Le Divin Verbe sera du ciel frappé,
    Qui ne pourra proceder plus avant,
    Du resserrant le secret estoupé,
    Quon marchera par dessus & devant.

    English.

    The Divine Word shall be struck by Heaven,
    So that he shall proceed no further,
    The secret of the close Keeper, shall be so closed up,
    That people shall tread upon, and before it.

ANNOT.

By the Divine Word, you must not understand the second person of the
Trinity, or else all this Stanza would be absurd; but you must understand
a Divine or Theologian, called in Greek θεόλογος, which signifieth a
Divine Word. The meaning therefore of it, is, that a Theologian shall
be struck by Heaven; that is, shall die, so that he shall proceed no
further in his work, which I suppose by the two last Verses, was the
Philosophers stone; for in the two last Verses he saith, that the secret
of the close Keeper, that is, of him that wrought secretly, shall (by
his death) be so closed up, that people shall tread on, and before it.


XXVIII.

    French.

    Le penultiesme de Surnom de Prophete,
    Prendra Diane pour son jour & repos,
    Loing vaguera par Frenetique teste,
    Et delivrant un grand peuple d’Impos.

    English.

    The last, but one of the Sirname of the Prophet,
    Shall take Diana for his day and his rest,
    He shall wander far by reason of his Frenetick head,
    Delivering a great people from impositions.

ANNOT.

This is concerning a false Prophet, which is called here the last but
one of that Surname, who shall make Diana (that is Monday which is
dedicated to Diana) his Sunday or Sabbath day, and so wandring to
and fro in a Frenetick manner, shall perswade many people to pay no
Taxes.


XXIX.

    French.

    L’Oriental sortira de son Siege,
    Passer les Monts Apennins, voir la Gaule,
    Transpassera le Ciel, les Eaux & Neige,
    Et un chacun frappera de sa Gaule.

    English.

    The Oriental shall come out of his Seat,
    Shall pass over the Apennine Mountains, and see France,
    Shall go over the Air, the Waters and Snow,
    And shall strike every one with his Rod.

ANNOT.

It is an Eastern Prince, who leaving his Countrey, shall come over the
Apennine Mountains, which divide Italy, and come as far as France,
destroying all before him.


XXX.

    French.

    Un qui les Dieux d’Annibal infernaux,
    Fera renaistre, effrayeur des Humains,
    Onc plus d’horreur ne plus dire journaux,
    Qu’avint viendra par Babel aux Romains.

    English.

    One that shall cause the infernal Gods of Hannibal
    To live again, the terror of Mankind,
    There was never more horror, not to say ill dayes,
    Did happen, or shall, to the Romans by Babel.

ANNOT.

This Prophecy was concerning Charles V. Emperour, who sacked Rome,
took the Pope Prisoner, and filled it with more horror and slaughter than
Hannibal did, though a Heathen.


XXXI.

    French.

    En Campanie le Cassilin fera tant,
    Quon ne verra que d’Aux les Champs couvers,
    Devant apres la pluye de long temps,
    Hormis les arbres rien lon verra de verts.

    English.

    In Campania the Cassilin shall so behave himself,
    That nothing shall be seen but Fields covered with Garlick,
    Before, and after it, shall not Rain for a good while,
    Except the Trees, no Green shall be seen.

ANNOT.

This hath a dependance upon the foregoing Stanza; for Campania is the
Province wherein Rome is seated, and Cassilin, called Campania
di Roma, is the same as Castillan, because Charles V. was not
only Emperour, but also King of Spain, the chief Province of which
is Castilia: therefore the Author describeth here the misery and
devastation of Campania di Roma by the Castilian, who left nothing in
the ground, but Garlick, which is their most delicate food, and nothing
Green but the Trees.


XXXII.

    French.

    Lait Sang, Grenovilles, escouldre en Dalmatie,
    Conflit donné, peste pres de Balene,
    Cry sera grand par toute Esclavonie,
    Lors naistra Monstre pres & dedans Ravenne.

    English.

    Milk, Blood, Frogs shall reign in Dalmatia,
    A Battle fought, the Plague near Balene,
    A great cry shall be through all Sclavonia,
    Then shall be born a Monster, near and within Ravenna.

ANNOT.

Dalmatia and Sclavonia, are Countreys joyning to the Adriatick Sea,
belonging to the Venetians. Ravenna is a City in Italy, the rest
needeth no interpretation.


XXXIII.

    French.

    Dans le torrent qui descend de Verone,
    Par lors qu’au Pau guidera son entrée,
    Un grand Naufrage, & non moins en Garonne,
    Quand ceux de Genes Marcheront leur contrée.

    English.

    In the torrent which cometh down from Verona,
    About the place where it falleth into the Pau,
    A great Shipwrack, and no less in Garonna,
    When those of Genoa shall go into their Countrey.

ANNOT.

Verona is a City in Italy, belonging to the Venetians, through
the middle of which runneth a River called Adde, which falleth into
the River Pau, about which place there shall be a great Shipwrak; as
also another in the River of Garonna, which passeth at Bordeaux, the
time that the Author marketh, is when those of Genoa shall go into
their Countrey, that is to say, when some Ships of Genoa shall come to
Bordeaux.


XXXIV.

    French.

    L’Ire insensée du Combat furieux,
    Fera a Table par Freres le Fer luire,
    Les departir, blessé, curieux,
    Le fier duel viendra en France nuire.

    English.

    The mad anger of the furious fight,
    Shall cause by Brothers the Iron to glister at the Table,
    To part them one wounded, curious,
    The fierce Duel shall do harm after in France.

ANNOT.

It is the short History of two Brothers, who fought at the Table, whereby
one that was curious to part them was wounded, they afterwards fought a
Duel, in whose imitation many since have been fought, to the great harm
of the French Gentry.


XXXV.

    French.

    Dans deux Logis de nuit le feu prendra,
    Plusieurs dedans estoufez & rostis,
    Pres de deux Fleuves pour seur il adviendra,
    Sol, l’Arc, & Caper, tous seront amortis.

    English.

    The fire shall take by night in two Houses,
    Many shall be stifled and burnt in it;
    Near two Rivers it shall for certain happen,
    Sun, Arc, Caper, they shall all be mortified.

ANNOT.

By Sun, Arc, Caper, he meaneth the Sun being in the Signs of
Sagitarius and Capricornus.

This Prophecy was fulfilled about 90. years ago in the City of Lion,
seated upon two Rivers, viz. the Rhosne and the Saone, for about
that time several Merchants coming to the Fair, some went to lodge at the
Silver Head, in the street de la Grenete, where being in an upper room,
as they were talking of their businesses, and passing the time merrily,
the fire took in the Kitchen where was abundance of Oil, which did burn
so suddenly and so violently, that the lower part of the House was
presently consumed. Those Merchants that were in the upper room towards
the street, begun to look for their Clock-bags, that were lockt up in a
Trunk; but while they were busie about opening the Trunk, the Stair-case
fell, and the fire got into their Room, then begun they to cry for help
through the Windows. They would willingly have thrown themselves down
the Windows, but they were barred with Iron, so that they could not save
themselves, the House being a fire on all sides; Moreover, the neighbours
taking more care of their own Houses, then of those Strangers, did run
every one to his own concerns, so that they all miserably perished.
Parradin in his 3. Book of the History of Lyon, Chap. 22.


XXXVI.

    French.

    Du grand Prophete les Lettres seront prinses,
    Entre les Mains du Tyran deviendront,
    Frauder son Roy seront ses entreprinses,
    Mais ses rapines bien tost le troubleront.

    English.

    The Letters of the great Prophet shall be intercepted,
    They shall fall into the hands of the Tyrant,
    His undertakings shall be to deceive his King,
    But his extortions shall trouble him soon.

ANNOT.

It is some eminent Churchman, whose Letters shall be intercepted, by
which he intended to betray his King, therefore his actions shall be
called in question, and being found guilty of extortion, he shall suffer
for it.


XXXVII.

    French.

    De ce grand nombre que l’on envoiera,
    Pour secourir dans le fort assiegez,
    Peste & Famine tous les devorera,
    Horsmis septante qui seront profligez.

    English.

    Of that great number which shall be sent,
    To succour the besieged in the Fort,
    Plague and Famine shall devour them all,
    Except seventy that shall be beaten.

ANNOT.

This is so plain, that it needeth no explication.


XXXVIII.

    French.

    Des Condamnez sera fait un grand nombre,
    Quand les Monarques seront conciliez,
    Mais l’un deux viendra si mal encombre,
    Que guere ensemble ne seront raliez.

    English.

    There shall be a great number of condemned men,
    When the Monarchs shall be reconciled,
    But one of them shall come to such misfortune,
    That their reconciliation shall not last long.

ANNOT.

The words and sense of this are easie to be understood.


XXXIX.

    French.

    Un an devant le conflict Italique,
    Germains, Gaulois, Espagnols pour le Fort,
    Cherra l’Escole maison de republique,
    Ou horsmis peu, seront suffoquez morts.

    English.

    One year before the Italian fight,
    Germans, French, Spaniards for the Fort,
    The School-house of the Common-wealth shall fall,
    Where, except few, they shall be suffocated, and dead.

ANNOT.

It seemeth there should be a Battle between the Italians, Germans,
French, Spaniards for a Fort, which I suspect to have been that of
Serizoles, wherein all those Nations were engaged, and that one year
before that Battle, the publick house of a Common-wealth should fall,
and kill abundance of people; But of this I could find nothing in History.


XL.

    French.

    Un peu apres non point long intervalle,
    Par Mer & Terre sera fait grand tumulte,
    Beaucoup plus grande sera pugne Navalle,
    Feu, Animaux, qui plus feront d’Insulte.

    English.

    A little while after, without any great distance of time,
    By Sea and Land shall a great tumult be made,
    The Sea fight shall be much greater,
    Fire and Beasts which shall make greater insult.

ANNOT.

This hath a Relation to a foregoing Stanza, and likewise is not hard to
be understood.


XLI.

    French.

    La grand Estoile par sept jours bruslera,
    Nuce fera deux Soleils apparoir,
    Le gros mastin toute nuit hurlera,
    Quand grand Pontife changera de terroir.

    English.

    The great Star shall burn for the space of seven days,
    A Cloud shall make two Suns appear,
    The big Mastif shall houl all night,
    When the great Pope shall change his Countrey.

ANNOT.

The meaning of this is, that those three Prodigies, contained in the
first three Verses, shall appear when a Pope changeth his Countrey.


XLII.

    French.

    A Coq, Chiens, & Chats de sang seront repeus,
    Et de la playe du Tyran trouvé Mort,
    Au lict d’un autre, Jambes & Bras rompus,
    Qui n’avoit peu mourir de cruel Mort.

    English.

    A Cock, Dogs, and Cats shall be fed with Blood,
    And with the wound of the Tyrant found dead,
    In the bed of another, with Legs and Arms broken,
    Who could not die before by a cruel Death.

ANNOT.

These words signifie, that a great man or Tyrant shall be found dead in
another mans Bed, having his Legs and Arms broken, the body of which
shall be devoured by these three kinds of Creatures, a Cock, a Dog,
and a Cat. The last Verse signifieth that this Tyrant had escaped a
cruel Death.


XLIII.

    French.

    Durant l’estoile cheuelue apparente,
    Les trois grand Princes seront faits ennemis,
    Frappez du Ciel, Paix, Terre tremulente,
    Arne, Tibre, undans Serpent sur le bord mis.

    English.

    During the hairy apparent Star,
    The three great Princes shall be made Enemies,
    Struck from Heaven, Peace, quaking Earth,
    Arne, Tyber, full of Surges, Serpent cast upon the Shore.

ANNOT.

In the year 1556. upon the first day of March appeared a blazing Star
which lasted three Months, and in that year the three great Princes were
made Enemies, viz. Paul IV. Pope, Henry II. King of France, and
Philip II. King of Spain, about the breaking of the Truce by Henry
II.

The Affairs not succeeding according to the Pope’s, and the King of
France’s desire, they made Peace with the Spaniard the 14th of
October 1557. and because it was an effect of Gods Providence, which
moved the Pope’s, and the Kings hearts; the Author saith, they were
struck from Heaven.

After this Peace the Author mentions an Earth-quake, which is very
likely considering the overflowing of the Tyber, which followed
immediately.

The night after, that Peace was proclaimed at Rome, on a Tuesday
the Tyber did so overflow his Banks, that the inundation was thought
the greatest that ever was, yea greater than that which happened in the
year 1530. under Clement VII.

There were ten or twelve Mills carried away, all the Vine-yards along the
Tyber, from Pontemole to St. Peters Church, were buried under the
Sands, that the water carried.

Abundance of Houses fell to the ground. In Rome many Gardens and houses
of pleasure were destroyed, the loss of the Wines, Hay, Wood, and Corn
could not be valued.

In Florence the River of Arno did more mischief than the Tyber at
Rome, the History of the Genealogy of the house of Medicis, made
by Peter de Boissat, mentioneth, that in some places of the City of
Florence, the water overflowed to the heigth of eight Fathoms, and
covered all the valley of Arne.

The damage was yet greater at Empoly, a Town in Tuscany, where, of
three thousand people, there escaped but eighteen.

But to return to Tyber, its waters being retired into their Channel,
left so much mud, where it had overflowed, that no body could walk
upon it, and upon that mud near the Tyber, was a Serpent seen of a
prodigious bigness, which was killed by the Countrey people.

This is the Authors meaning in the last Verse, Arne, Tyber, full of
Surges, Serpent cast upon the Shore.

In the third Verse he saith, those three Princes were struck or moved
from Heaven to make Peace, that is, from God; every one considering
that this War was only for their mutual distruction.

The Vulgar impression putteth in the fourth Verse, Pau, Tyber, in
stead of Arne, Tyber, which is a visible fault; for the History
mentioneth only the inundation of those two Rivers in Italy, it may be
that the likeness of those words, Pau and Arne, is the cause of the
mistake; as also because the name of Pau, which is the biggest River
in Italy, is more famous in History than that of Arne, which is the
River that passeth through Florence.


XLIV.

    French.

    L’Aigles poussée entour de Pavillons,
    Par autre oiseaux d’Entour sera chassé,
    Quand bruit de Timbres, Tubes, & Sonaillons,
    Rendront le sens de la Dame insensée.

    English.

    The Eagle flying among the Tents,
    By other Birds shall be driven away,
    When noise of Cymbals, Trumpets, and Bells,
    Shall render the sense to the Lady that was without it.

ANNOT.

It is an Eagle driven from the Tents by other Birds, when a mad Lady
shall recover her senses by the noise of Cymbals, Trumpets, and Bells.


XLV.

    French.

    Trop le Ciel pleure l’Androgyn procrée,
    Pres de Ciel sang humain respandu,
    Par mort trop tard grand peuple recrée,
    Tard & tost vient le secours attendu.

    English.

    The Heaven bemoaneth too much the Androgyn born,
    Near Heaven humane blood shall be spilt,
    By death too late a great people shall be refreshed,
    Late and soon cometh the succours expected.

ANNOT.

Androgyn, is one that is Male and Female, from the Greek word ἀνηρ,
which signifieth a Male, and γυνή, which signifieth a Female; the meaning
then of the first Verse is, that some great persons, suppose a King and
Queen, which he calleth Heaven, by reason of their exaltation above the
common sort of people, shall bemoan too long one of their Children, that
was, or shall be born Male and Female.

The second Verse is easie to be understood, if you take Heaven in the
same sense that we have said. The last two Verses are plain.


XLVI.

    French.

    Apres grand troche humain, plus grand sapreste,
    Le grand Moteur les siecles renouvelle,
    Pluye, Sang, Lait, Famine, Fer & Peste,
    Au Ciel veu feu courant longue estincelle.

    English.

    After a great humane change, another greater is nigh at hand,
    The great Motor reneweth the Ages,
    Rain, Blood, Milk, Famine, Sword, Plague,
    In the Heaven shall be seen a running fire with long sparks.

ANNOT.

Troche in Greek is a Pulley, the meaning therefore of the Author, that
after a great mutation, God shall renew the Ages, and according to his
promise shall create a new Heaven, and a new Earth.

By those prodigies related in the two last Verses, it seemeth the Author
intendeth to speak of the last day, and of the fore-runners of it.


XLVII.

    French.

    L’Ennemy grand viel, deult, meurt de poison,
    Les Souverains par infinis subjugues,
    Pierres pleuvoir cache soubs la Toison,
    Par mort Articles en vain sont alleguez.

    English.

    The great and old Enemy grieveth, dieth by Poison,
    An infinite number of Soveraign’s conquered,
    It shall rain stones, they shall hide under Rocks,
    In vain shall death alledge Articles.

ANNOT.

This hath a relation to the foregoing Stanza, and is as it were the
second part of it. For as the foremost speaketh of the last day, so doth
this of Dooms-day.

First, he saith that the great and old Enemy grieveth and dieth by
Poison, that’s the Devil who shall be cast into a Lake of Fire and
Brimstone. The second Verse signifieth, that all the Kings of the Earth
shall be subdued by him that is Lord of Lords and King of Kings. The
third Verse expresseth, the anguish of the reprobate, when they shall cry
to the Rocks, hide us, and to the Mountains, fall upon us. And the fourth
Verse saith, that Death shall alledge in vain, the Articles she made with
the Devil, and his Angels.


XLVIII.

    French.

    La grand Copie qui passera les Monts,
    Saturne, Aries, tournant au Poisson Mars,
    Venins cachez sous testes de Moutons,
    Leur chef pendu a fil de Polemars.

    English.

    The great Army that shall pass over the Mountains,
    Saturn, Aries, Mars, turning to the Fishes,
    Poisons hidden in Sheeps heads,
    Their Captain hang’d with a thred of Polemars.

ANNOT.

Paradin relateth in his History, that after the Duke of Alba had
relieved Vulpian with Victuals, which was done from the 22. of July
to the first of August, a Captain of the Emperors Army named la
Trinité, went out of Valfrenieres the same first day of August, to
plunder the Countrey of Piemont.

He had 400 Horses, and 500 Foot: The news being brought to the Marshal
of Brissac, he sent out a great number of Horses, who did utterly
destroy their Foot, so that but thirty escaped, to carry the news to
Valfrenieres.

The Spanish Horse, seeing the French in such a fury, ran away, and
got some to Ast, some to Alexandria.

After that, the Spaniards seeking to revenge themselves, took a Castle
three miles from Cazal, called Frezene, or Fracinet du Pau, where
they hanged up the Captain, put to the sword all the Italians, and sent
all the French to the Galleys.

This proceeding being not according to the Laws of Arms, we may believe,
that the victorious discovered a malitious craft of the vanquished,
who had left some Sheeps-heads poisoned, to revenge themselves of the
victorious, which obliged the Spaniards to serve so the Captain, the
Italians and the French; and because the French were not so ill
used, as the Italians, we may judge that the Italians were the chief
contrivers of this business.

Therefore the Author foreseeing this, saith, that the great Army of the
French, which shall go over the Mountains, shall come to this mischief,
because of the poison that was hidden in the Sheeps heads.

The Vulgar impression erreth much in putting Salmons, for Muttons;
for every body knoweth that the Salmons do not come into the Mountains
of Montserrat, and that in the Month of August it is not a meat fit
for Souldiers, therefore in stead of Salmons, we have put Muttons, or
Sheep.

The Captain was hanged with a thread of Polemars, that is, with a
Match, of which, I am perswaded, that one certain Polemars was the
Inventor.

The Author saith in the second Verse, that the time when this accident
happened, was, when Saturn was in Aries, the Vulgar impression
putteth Are in stead of Aries, but that’s false, therefore set down
Aries. Saturn was in that Sign in the year 1555. from the 20th of
February, to the 14th of July, where from the 12th degree and four
Minutes, he began to retrograde in the same Sign of Aries, till the
18th of November, so that Saturn was almost all that year in Aries.

He saith also that Mars was going back to Pisces; because in that
same year, Mars that was gone out of the Sign of Pisces from the 19
of March 1554. was retrograding to come back again into it upon the
20th of January 1556.

Thus the Author meaneth, that this accident should happen in the year
that Saturn should be in Aries, and Mars should be near the Sign of
Pisces.

And to say truth, in the Month of August, Mars was in the Sign
of Scorpio; upon the 23 of September, he entred into that of
Sagitarius; the third of November, into that of Capricornus; the
12th of December into that of Aquarius; and the year following,
viz. 1556. into that of Pisces; so that Mars was returning into
Pisces, which is the end of its particular motion.

By this Astrological and Historical discourse we correct the Vulgar
impression, which putteth turning from Pisces, Mars, in stead of
which, we put, turning to Pisces, Mars, which we do by changing
only from, into to, and sheweth us how careful we ought to be in
the explication of these Stanza’s, when the time is prefixed to us by
Astronomical calculations.

The Authors Phrase doth confirm us in this correction, when he useth this
word turning, which signifieth the motion that tendeth towards its end,
and not the motion that cometh from its end.


XLIX.

    French.

    Les conseillers du premier Monopole,
    Les Conquerans seduits par la Melite,
    Rhodes, Bisance pour leur exposant pole,
    Terre faudra les pour-suivans de fuite.

    English.

    The advisers of the first Monopoly,
    The Conquerors seduced by the Melite,
    Rhodes, Bizance, for exposing their Pole,
    The ground shall fail the followers of runaways.

ANNOT.

All the difficulty of this lieth in the signification of the word Pole,
which in Greek signifieth a City. The word Monopoly is Vulgar, and
signifieth when one or few would engross all the Trade of a Town. The
rest is so obscure, that I had rather leave it to the liberty of the
Reader, than break my Brains about it, considering chiefly that I am
going to bed, the precedent Stanza having exhausted all my Spirits, and
so farewell till to morrow.


L.

    French.

    Quand ceux d’Hainault, de Gand, & de Bruxelles,
    Verront a Langres le Siege devant mis,
    Derrier leur flancs seront guerres cruelles,
    La playe antique sera pis qu’Ennemis.

    English.

    When these of Hainault, of Gand, and of Bruxelles,
    Shall see the Siege laid before Langres,
    Behind their sides shall be cruel Wars,
    The old wound shall be worse then Enemies.

ANNOT.

Hainault is a Province of the Low-Countries, and Gand the chief
Town in Flanders, and Bruxelles the chief Town of the Dukedome of
Brabant.

Langres is a City in France, in the Province of Champagne, which is
called the Maiden Town; because it was never besieged. The rest is easie.


LI.

    French.

    Le sang du juste a Londres fera faute,
    Bruslez par feu de vingt & trois les Six,
    La Dame antique cherra de place haute,
    De mesme secte plusieurs seront occis.

    English.

    The blood of the just shall be wanting in London,
    Burnt by fire of three and twenty, the Six,
    The antient Dame shall fall from her high place,
    Of the same Sect many shall be killed.

ANNOT.

Leaving unto the impartial Reader his liberty to judge of this Prophecy,
we for our part understand by it the impious and execrable murder,
committed upon the person of our last most gracious Sovereign King
Charles I. of blessed memory, to whose expiation it seemeth our Author
attributeth the conflagration of London. By that proportion of three
and twenty, the Six, is to be understood the number of Houses and
Buildings that were burnt, which is about the proportion of three in
four, and cometh near to the computation, as also by that three twenties
and Six, may be understood the year 66. By the antient Dame that shall
fall from the high place, is understood the Cathedral Church of St.
Paul, which in the time of Paganism was dedicated to Diana, meant
here by the title of an antient Dame, the fall from her high place,
hath relation both to the sumptuousness and height of her building, as
also to her situation, which is in the most eminent place of the City.

By this Verse, Of the same Sect many shall be killed, is signified the
great number of other Churches even the number of 87 (which he intimateth
here by the name of the same Sect), that should be involved in the same
woful conflagration.


LII.

    French.

    Dans plusieurs nuits la Terre tremblera,
    Sur le printemps deux efforts feront suitte,
    Corinthe, Ephese aux deux Mers nagera,
    Guerre sesmeut par deux vaillants de Luitte.

    English.

    During many nights the Earth shall quake,
    About the Spring two great Earth-quakes shall follow one another,
    Corinth, Ephesus shall swim in the two Seas,
    War shall be moved by two great Wrestlers.

ANNOT.

Corinth is a City of Grecia and Ephesus one of Asia; the rest is
plain.


LIII.

    French.

    Le grande Peste de cité maritime,
    Ne cessera que Mort ne soit vengée,
    Du juste sang par prix damné sans crime,
    De la grande Dame par feinte noutragée.

    English.

    The great Plague of the Maritime City,
    Shall not cease till the death be revenged
    Of the just blood by price condemned without crime,
    Of the great Dame not fainedly abused.

ANNOT.

This is a confirmation of the LI. Stanza and foretelleth the great Plague
we have had here in the year 1665. which he saith shall not cease till
the death of the Just blood, meaning King Charles the I. be avenged who
was as is here expressed, condemned without crime, and sold for a Price.

By the great Dame unfainedly abused, he meaneth the sumptuous Cathedral
of St. Paul, which was polluted and made a Stable by those prophane
wretches.


LIV.

    French.

    Par gent estrange & Nation lointaine,
    Leur grand Cité, apres eau fort troublée,
    Fille sans trop different de domaine,
    Prins chef, serreure, navoir esté riblée.

    English.

    By a strange people and remote Nation,
    The great City near the water shall be much troubled,
    The Girl without great difference for a portion,
    Shall take the Captain, the Lock having not been pickt.

ANNOT.

In the explication of this mystical Stanza, I believe every body may be
as wise as I.


LV.

    French.

    Dans le conflit le grand qui peu valoit,
    A son dernier fera cas merveilleux,
    Pendant qu’Adrie verra ce qu’il failloit,
    Dans le Banquet poignarde l’orgueilleux.

    English.

    In the fight the great one who was but little worth,
    At his last endeavour shall do a wonderful thing.
    While Adria shall see what was wanting,
    In the Banquet he shall stabb the proud one.

ANNOT.

This is concerning some eminent person, who having shewed no great valour
in a Battle, shall nevertheless in a Banquet be so bold as to stab a
person of quality, that was proud.

This accident must happen somewhere about Venice, because he saith that
Adria, which is taken for Venice shall look on.


LVI.

    French.

    Que Peste & Glaive n’a sceu definer,
    Mort dans les pluies, sommet du Ciel frappé,
    L’Abbé mourra quand verra ruiner,
    Ceux du Naufrage, l’Escueil voulant graper.

    English.

    He whom neither Plague, nor Sword could destroy,
    Shall die in the Rain being stricken with Thunder,
    The Abbot shall die when he shall see ruined,
    Those in the Shipwrack, striving to catch hold of the Rock.

ANNOT.

There is two accidents contained in this Stanza, the first is in the
two first Verses, where he saith that some considerable person, who had
escaped the Sword, and the Plague shall be strucken by the Thunder, and
die in a great showr of Rain.

The second is, in the two last Verses, where he saith, an Abbot shall
perish by Shipwrack, thinking to save himself by holding the Rock.


LVII.

    French.

    Avant conflit le grand tombera,
    Le grand a mort trop subite & plainte,
    Nay miparfait, la plus part nagera,
    Aupres du Fleuve, de sang la Terre teinte.

    English.

    Before the Battle the great one shall fall,
    The great one to death too sudden and bewailed;
    One shall be born half perfect, the most part shall swim,
    Near the River the Earth shall be dyed with blood.

ANNOT.

The words are plain enough, but of the sense every one may think what he
pleaseth.


LVIII.

    French.

    Sans pied ne main, dent aigue, & forte.
    Par Globe au fort de Port & laisne nay,
    Pres du portail, desloial le transporte,
    Seline luit, petit grand emmené.

    English.

    Without foot or hand, sharp and strong tooth,
    By a Globe, in the middle of the Port, and the first born,
    Near the Gate shall be transported by a Traitor,
    Seline shineth, the little great one carried away.

ANNOT.

The sense of the whole is this, that an Infant begot by some person of
quality shall be exposed in the night time, the Moon Shining, which he
calleth Seline, from the Greek word σεληνη, which signifieth the Moon.


LIX.

    French.

    Classe Gauloise par appuy de grand Garde,
    Du grand Neptune & ses tridens Soldats,
    Ronger Provence pour soustenir grand bande,
    Plus Mars, Narbon, par Javelots & Dards.

    English.

    The French Fleet by the help of the great Guard,
    Of great Neptune and his Tridentary Soldiers
    Shall gnaw Provence by keeping great company,
    Besides, Mars shall plague Narbon by Javelins and Darts.

ANNOT.

Here be two things designed in this Stanza one is concerning Provence,
which shall be eaten up by Soldiers, and the other concerning the City
of Narbon, which shall be Besieged, or the Citizens fall out among
themselves.


LX.

    French.

    La foy Punique en Orient rompue,
    Grand Jud. & Rhosne, Loire & Tag changeront,
    Quand du Mulet la faim sera repeue,
    Classe espargie, Sang & Corps nageront.

    English.

    The punick faith broken in the East,
    Great Jud. and Rhosne, Loire and Tag. shall be changed,
    When the Mules hunger shall be satisfied,
    The Fleet scattered, Blood and Bodies shall swim.

ANNOT.

The Punick Faith in Latine Punica fides, a false Faith, was so
called from the Carthaginians, called in Latine Pæni, which was an
unfaithful Nation.

I do not know what he meaneth by great Jud. as for Rhosne, Loire
and Tag, they are three Rivers, the two first in France, the last is
the River of Lisbone called in Latine Tagus. The rest is easie.


LXI.

    French.

    Agen, Tonneins, Gironde & la Rochelle,
    O sang Troien mort au Port de la fleche,
    Derrier le Fleuve au Fort mise leschelle,
    Pointes, feu, grand meurtre sur la bresche.

    English.

    Agen, Tonneins, Gironde and Rochelle,
    O Trojan blood death is at the harbour of the Arrow,
    Beyond the River the Ladder shall be raised against the Fort,
    Points, fire, great murder upon the breach.

ANNOT.

Agen and Tonneins are two Towns in Gascony, Gironde is a River
that passeth in that Countrey, the sense therefore of the whole is, that
there shall be great Wars, and fightings in those Towns, as also upon
that River, which happened in the time of the civil Wars in France, as
every body may read in the Annals, and also in the Commentaries of the
Lord of Monluck.


LXII.

    French.

    Mabus puis tost alors mourra, viendra,
    Des gens & bestes un horrible desfaite,
    Puis tout a coup la vengeance on verra,
    Sang, Main, Soif, Faim, quand courra la Comete.

    English.

    Mabus shall come, and soon after shall die,
    Of people and beasts shall be an horrible destruction,
    Then on a sudden the vengeance shall be seen,
    Blood, Hand, Thirst, Famine, when the Comet shall run.

ANNOT.

Here is nothing hard but who should be this Mabus, at last I found by
transposition of Letters that he meaneth Ambus, which was the name of
the Heades man that beheaded the Duke of Montmorency at Thoulouse,
how miraculous therefore appeareth our Author, who did not only foretell
general things, but also particular accidents, even the names of the
persons that were to be born a hundred years after.


LXIII.

    French.

    Gaulois, Ausone bien peu subiuguera,
    Pau, Marne & Seine fera Perme l’Vrie,
    Qui le grand Mur contre eux dressera,
    Du moindre au Mur le grand perdra la vie.

    English.

    The French shall a little subdue Ausonne,
    Pau, Marne, and Seine shall make Perme l’Urie,
    Which shall raise a great Wall against them,
    From the less to the Wall the great one shall loose his life.

ANNOT.

Ausonne is always taken by the Author for the City of Bordeaux,
because Ausonius a famous Latine Poet was born there, the rest is so
obscure, and the text so corrupted, that I had rather leave it to the
liberty of the Reader, then to become ridiculous, by not acknowledging my
ignorance.


LXIV.

    French.

    Seicher de faim, de soif, gent Genevoise,
    Espoir prochain viendra au defaillir,
    Sur point tremblant sera Loy Gebenoise,
    Classe au grand Port ne se peut accueillir.

    English.

    Those of Geneva shall be dried up with hunger and thirst,
    A near hope shall come when they shall be fainting,
    The Gebenna Law shall be upon a quaking point,
    The Navy shall not be capable to come into the Port.

ANNOT.

Here you must observe that Gebenna in Latine signifieth Geneva, and
therefore this whole Stanza is concerning the City of Geneva.


LXV.

    French.

    Le park enclin grande calamité,
    Par l’Hesperie & Insubre sera,
    Le Feu en Nef, Peste, & Captivité,
    Mercure en l’Ar, Saturn fenera.

    English.

    The Park enclineth to great calamity,
    Which shall be through Hesperia and Insubria,
    The Fire in the Ship, Plague, and Captivity,
    Mercury in Aries, Saturn shall wither.

ANNOT.

Though the words be plain, nevertheless the sense is very obscure, and
chiefly as I suppose by the faults of the impression, all what I can tell
you here, is, that Hesperia in Latine, is Spain, and Insubria, is
Savoy.


LXVI.

    French.

    Par grand dangers le Captif eschapé,
    Peu de temps grand a fortune changée,
    Dans le Palais le peuple est attrapé,
    Par bonne augure la Cité assiegée.

    English.

    The Prisoner escaped through great danger,
    A little while after shall become great, his fortune being changed,
    In the Palace the people shall be caught,
    And by a good Sign the City shall be besieged.

ANNOT.

All this is plain, both in the words and the Sense.


LXVII.

    French.

    Le blond au nez forche viendra commettre,
    Par le Duel & chassera dehors,
    Les exiles dedans fera remettre,
    Aux lieux marins commettans les plus forts.

    English.

    The fair one shall fight with the forked Nose,
    In Duel, and expel him out,
    He shall re-establish the banished,
    Putting the stronger of them in Maritine places.

ANNOT.

Both the Sense and the words are plain.


LXVIII.

    French.

    De l’Aquilon les efforts seront grands,
    Sur l’Occean sera la Porte ouverte,
    Le Regne en l’Isle sera re-integrand,
    Tremblera Londres par voiles descouvertes.

    English.

    The endevours of the North shall be great,
    Upon the Ocean the gate shall be open,
    The Kingdom in the Island shall be re-established,
    London shall quake, for fear of Sails discovered.

ANNOT.

This is a very remarkable one, which hath been fulfilled since the happy
restauration of his sacred Majesty King Charles II. now Reigning: For
the endevours of the North, (viz. the Dutch) have been very great.
The ocean; like a gate, hath been open to all kind of Armies, to play
their pranks upon. His Majesty, and Kingdom, have been happily restored.


LXIX.

    French.

    Le Roy Gaulois par la Celtique dextre,
    Voiant discorde de la grand Monarchie,
    Sur les trois parts fera fleurir son Sceptre,
    Contre la Cappe de la grand Hierarchie.

    English.

    The French King, by the Low-Countreys right hand,
    Seeing the discord of the great Monarchy,
    Upon three parts of it, will make his Scepter to flourish,
    Against the Cap of the great Hierarchy.

ANNOT.

This signifieth, that the French King, through the discord that is in
the Spanish Monarchy, shall cause his Scepter to flourish upon three
parts of the Netherlands; notwithstanding the assistance of the King of
Spain, who is called here the Cap of the great Hierarchy; that is,
the great defender of the Popedom and Popery.


LXX.

    French.

    Le Dard du Ciel fera son estendue,
    Morts en parlant, grande execution,
    La pierre en larbre la fiere gent rendue,
    Brait Humain, Monstre purge expiation.

    English.

    The Dart of Heaven shall make his circuit,
    Some die speaking, a great execution,
    The stone in the tree, the fierce people humbled,
    Humane noise, a Monster purged by expiation.

ANNOT.

All this Stanza signifieth nothing but a fearful Thunder and Lightning,
called here, the Dart of Heaven, that shall do a great deal of
mischief; for as he saith, some shall die speaking, there shall be
a great execution, the Thunderbolt shall stick in the Tree,
the people that was fierce, shall be humbled, and a Monster purged by
expiation, that some notorious wicked person shall be consumed by that
Cœlestial fire.


LXXI.

    French.

    Les exiles en Sicile viendront,
    Pour delivrer de faim la gent estrange,
    Au point du jour les Celtes luy faudront,
    La vie demeure a raison Roy se range.

    English.

    The banished persons shall come into Sicily,
    To free the forrain Nation from hunger,
    In the dawning of the day the Celtes shall fail them,
    Their Life shall be preserved, the King shall submit to reason.

ANNOT.

It is hard to judge what he meaneth by that Forreign Nation, which
shall be relieved in Sicily, by the banished, nor what King is that
which shall submit to reason; let it be left to every body’s private
judgement.


LXXII.

    French.

    Armée Celtique en Italie vexée,
    De toutes partes conflit & grande perte,
    Romains fuis O Gaule repoulsée,
    Pres du Thesin, Rubicon pugne incerte.

    English.

    The French Army shall be vexed in Italy,
    On all sides fighting, and great loss,
    The Romans run away, and thou France repulsed,
    Near the Thesin, by Rubicon the fight shall be doubtful.

ANNOT.

A French Army shall be distressed, if not destroyed in Italy. The
Romans, that is, those under the Pope, that shall take their part,
shall be put to flight, and this battle shall be fought by the River
Thesin. Another shall be fought by the River Rubicon, whose event
shall be doubtful, that is to say, it shall hardly be known who got the
victory.


LXXIII.

    French.

    Au Lac Fucin de Benacle Rivage,
    Pres du Leman au port de Lorguion,
    Nay de trois Bras prædit Bellique Image,
    Par trois courones au grand Endymion.

    English.

    At the Fucin Lake of the Benacle Shore,
    Near the Leman, at the Port of Lorguion,
    Born with three Arms, a Warlike Image,
    By three Crowns to the great Endimion.

ANNOT.

There is a Lake in Italy called Lacus Fucinius; the Lake of Geneva
is called Lacus Lemanus; the meaning then of this obscure Stanza, is,
(if I understand any thing) that a Monster shall be born with three
Arms, near one of those Lakes, which shall be a sign of great Wars: what
he meaneth by the three Crowns to the great Endymion, is unknown to me.


LXXIV.

    French.

    De Sens, d’Autun viendront jusques au Rhosne,
    Pour passer outre vers les Monts Pyrenée,
    La gent sortir de la Marque d’Ancone,
    Par Terre & Mer Suivra a grand trainées.

    English.

    They shall come from Sens and Autun, as far as the Rhosne,
    To go further to the Pyrenean Mountains,
    The Nation come from the Mark of Ancona,
    By Land and Sea shall follow speedily after.

ANNOT.

Sens and Autun are two Cities in France, the Pyrenean Mountains,
are those which divide France from Spain.


LXXV.

    French.

    La voix ouie de l’Insolit oiseau,
    Sur le Canon du respiral estage,
    Si haut viendra du froment le boisseau,
    Que l’homme d’homme sera Antropophage.

    English.

    The noise of the unwonted Bird having been heard,
    Upon the Canon of the highest story,
    The Bushel of Wheat shall rise so high,
    That man of man shall be Antropophage.

ANNOT.

This is a prediction of a mighty Famine, wherein men shall eat up one
another, when an unwonted Bird shall be seen and heard to cry, being
perched upon one of the biggest pieces of Ordinance.

Antropophage is a Greek word, signifying a Man-eater, from ἄνθροπος,
homo, and φαγος, comedens, of which sort of men there be too many
already.


LXXVI.

    French.

    Foudre en Bourgongne avec cas portenteux,
    Que par engin oncques ne pourroit faire,
    De leur Senat Sacriste fait boiteux,
    Fera Scavoir aux ennemis l’affaire.

    English.

    Lightning in Burgundy, with marvellous accidents,
    Which could never have been done by art,
    Of their Senate Sacriste being lamed,
    Shall make known the business to the enemies.

ANNOT.

The Senate or Parliament of Burgundy, sits at Dijon, among them
there is always a Church-man, that is one of the Judges, to see that
nothing be done to the prejudice of the Church. I suspect that it is he,
that is called here Sacriste, and who shall reveal the business to the
Enemies. The two first Verses need no explication.


LXXVII.

    French.

    Par Arcs, Fœux, Poix, & par feux repoussez,
    Cris hurlemens sur la minuit ouys,
    Dedans sont mis par les rempars cassez,
    Par Canicules les Traditeurs fuis.

    English.

    Being repulsed with Bows, Fires, and Pitch,
    Cries and howlings shall be heard about midnight,
    They shall get in through the broken Walls,
    The betrayers shall run away through the Conduits.

ANNOT.

It is a Town Besieged, where after a repulse given to the Besiegers, they
shall get in by the Treason of some within, who shall run away through
the Conduits or Channels of the Town.


LXXVIII.

    French.

    Le grand Neptune du profond de la Mer,
    De sang punique & sang Gaulois meslé,
    Les Isles a sang pour le tardif ramer,
    Plus luy nuira que loccult mal celé.

    English.

    The great Neptune in the middle of the Sea,
    Having joyned African and French blood,
    The Islands shall be put to the Sword, and the slow rowing
    Shall do them more prejudice, than the concealed evil.

ANNOT.

To understand this, you must know that Henry the II. King of France,
having renewed his Alliance with the Grand Seignior Sultan Solyman,
he asked him succours for to take Nice, which he pretended to belong
to the Earldom of Provence. To that purpose the Marshal of Brissac
went from Court with the Kings Army in the year 1557. to set upon Nice,
Savona, and Genoa, and so to hinder the Spaniard from coming by
Sea in Piemont, and the Milanese. The Turk sent him a good Fleet,
consisting of 105. Galleys, and 14. Galliots.

The French Fleet consisted of 26 Galleys, of which the great Prior was
Admiral, who went with them from the Castle of Yf, the 9. of June
1558.

Being at Sea, and not knowing where the Turkish Fleet was, he went to
and fro to seek it out, at last he found it pillaging and plundering
the Island of Minorica. The Turks had already taken the chief Town,
where 800. Turks were killed, which so incensed the rest, that they set
the Town on fire; then going up and down the Countrey, they took 5000.
Prisoners, and if the Lords of Carces and Vence had not stayed them,
they would have ruinated the whole Island.

Then forsaking the Island, they joyned with the French, but the
perfidious Bassa being bribed by the Genoeses, and those of Nice,
went slowly to work, and at last retreated without doing any thing for
the French. This is the relation of Cæsar Nostradamus, in his History
of Provence under Henry the II. and according to this the Author
saith, that the great Neptune in the middle of the Sea, shall joyn
~French~ and ~African~ blood. Neptune signifieth the Mediterranean
Sea.

The Islands shall be put to the Sword, by the taking of Minorica,
after which the Turks being bribed, went slowly to work, and in
conclusion did nothing of consequence.

The third and fourth Verse adds, that this Bassa’s slow rowing, shall
do them more prejudice then the concealed evil; that is, shall do more
damage to the French by his hidden design of the Bassa of not serving
the French; because this slowness of the Bassa spoiled the French
activity, lessened their provisions, and at last discouraged them;
whereas if the Turks had not come, the French Galleys alone were able
to take Nice.


LXXIX.

    French.

    La Barbe crespe & noire par engin,
    Subjuguera la gent cruelle & fiere,
    Le grand Cheyren ostera du longin,
    Tous les Captifs par Seline Baniere.

    English.

    The frizled and black Beard by fighting,
    Shall overcome the fierce and cruel Nation,
    The great Cheyren shall free from Bands,
    All the Captives made by Selyne Standard.

ANNOT.

This Prophecy was fulfilled in the year 1571. upon the seventh day of
October, when that famous Battle of Lepanto was fought between the
Christians and the Turks, the General of the Christians being Don Juan
of Austria, whom he calleth here the frizled and black Beard.

In this Battle the Christians lost 7566. men, and the Turks about 32000.
besides 220. Ships of all sorts, and all the Christian slaves released
that were in them. By the Selyne Banner is understood that of the great
Turk, whose name at that time was Selyne. By the great Cheyren is
understood Henry the II. King of France, who redeemed many slaves,
for Cheyren by transposition of Letters is Henry.


LXXX.

    French.

    Apres conflit du læse l’Eloquence,
    Par peu de temps se trame Saint repos,
    Point l’on admet les grand a delivrance.
    Des ennemis sont remis a propos.

    English.

    After the Battle, the eloquency of the wounded man,
    Within a little while shall procure a holy rest,
    The great ones shall not be delivered,
    But shall be left to their Enemies will.

ANNOT.

After the Battle of St. Laurence, the Prisoners taken by the Spaniard
were the Constable of France, the Dukes of Montpensier, of
Longueville, the Marshal S. André, Ludovic Prince of Mantua, the
Rhingrave Colonel of the Germans, the Earl of la Rochefoucaud, and
several other persons of quality.

They were Prisoners from the 10th of August 1557. to the third of
April 1559. that is, one year and eight Months; during which time the
Pope’s Nuncios, Christierne Dutchess Dowager of Lorraine, the
Constable, and Marshal St. André endeavoured to make the peace.

Among them the Constable was chief, and Philip the II. King of Spain
gave him leave to go to and fro upon his Paroll; and of him it is our
Author speaketh in the first Verse; After the Battle the eloquency of
the wounded man, that is after the Battle of Saint Laurence, where the
Constable of Monmorency was wounded in the hip. His eloquency procured
the peace, which was concluded in a short time, for had it not been for
the death of Queen Mary of England, that happened upon the 15 of
November 1558. it should have been concluded three Months after the
conference that was begun in the Abbey of Cercamp near Cambray.

The third Verse saith, that the great ones shall not be delivered,
because during the Treaty of Peace, Philip the II. would not hearken
to take any Ransom, but they were kept Prisoners till the Peace. It is
the meaning of the fourth Verse, when it saith, but shall be left to the
Enemies will, viz. the Spaniards who gave them liberty after the
Peace.


LXXXI.

    French.

    Par feu du Ciel la Cité presqu’aduste,
    L’Urne menace encor Deucalion,
    Vexée Sardaigne par la punique fuste,
    Apres le Libra lairra son Phaeton.

    English.

    By fire from Heaven the City shall be almost burnt,
    The Waters threatens another Deucalion,
    Sardaigne shall be vexed by an African Fleet,
    After that Libra shall have left her Phaeton.

ANNOT.

All is plain but the last Verse, the sense of which is, that the things
before spoken, shall happen when the Sun is newly come out of the sign of
Libra.


LXXVII.

    French.

    Par faim la proye fera Loup prisonier,
    L’Assaillant lors en extresme detresse,
    Lesnay ayant au devant le dernier,
    Le grand neschape au milieu de la presse.

    English.

    By hunger, the prey shall make the Wolf prisoner,
    Assaulting him then in a great distress,
    The eldest having got before the last,
    The great one doth not escape in the middle of the crowd.

ANNOT.

The two first Verses signifie, that an hungry Wolf seeking for a Prey,
shall be caught in some trap, where being almost famished, the Prey shall
assault him. The last two Verses being obscure and not material to any
thing I have neglected them.


LXXXIII.

    French.

    Le gros Traffic d’un grand Lion changé,
    La pluspart tourne en pristine ruine,
    Proye aux Soldats par playe vendangé,
    Par Jura Mont, & Sueve bruine.

    English.

    The great Trade of a great Lion alter’d,
    The most part turneth into its former ruine,
    Shall become a Prey to Soldiers and reaped by wound,
    In Mont-Jura, and Suaube great Foggs.

ANNOT.

This Prophecy is concerning the City of Lion in France, which is
a Town of an exceeding great Trade, and is threatned to suffer an
alteration, and a decay by War.

The last Verse is concerning a great Mist or Fogg, which shall be upon
Mont-Jura and in Suabeland.


LXXXIV.

    French.

    Entre Campagne, Sienne, Pise & Ostié,
    Six mois neuf jours ne pleuvra une goute,
    L’Estrange Langue en Terre Dalmatie,
    Courira sus vastant la Terre toute.

    English.

    Between Campania, Sienna, Pisa and Ostia,
    For six Months and nine days there shall be no rain,
    The strange Language in Dalmatia’s Land,
    Shall overrun, spoiling all the Countrey.

ANNOT.

All those places mentioned, in the first Verse are seated in Italy; the
Author saith that in that Countrey it shall not rain for the space of six
Months and nine days, which if it be past, or to come, I know not.

The two last Verses signifie, that a strange Nation shall come into
Dalmatia, and overrun and spoil all that Countrey.


LXXXV.

    French.

    Le vieux plein barbe soubs le statut severe,
    A Lion fait dessus l’Aigle Celtique,
    Le petit grand trop outre persevere,
    Bruit d’Arme au Ciel, Mer rouge Ligustique.

    English.

    The old plain beard under the severe Statute,
    Made at Lion upon the Celtique Aigle,
    The little great persevereth too far,
    Noise of Arms in the Skie, the Ligustrian Sea made red.

ANNOT.

I could scrape no sense out of the first three Verses; the last
signifieth, that a noise of Arms shall be heard in the Skies, and that
the Ligustrian Sea, which is that of Genoa, shall be made red with
blood, when the former prodigy hath appeared.


LXXXVI.

    French.

    Naufrage a classe pres d’Onde Adriatique,
    La Terre tremble emeue sur l’Air en Terre mis
    Ægypt tremble augment Mahometique,
    L’Heraut soy rendre a crier est commis.

    English.

    A Fleet shall suffer Shipwrack near the Adriatick Sea,
    The Earth quaketh, a motion of the Air cometh upon the Land,
    Ægypt trembleth for fear of the Mahometan increase.
    The Herald surrendring shall be appointed to cry.

ANNOT.

In the two first Verses is foretold a great storm by the Adriatick Sea,
in which a Fleet shall be dispersed, and many suffer Shipwrack.

The two last Verses relate the great fear Ægypt was in, when the great
Turk Sultan Selyn went to conquer it.

The last Verse is concerning a Herald, which was surrendered to the
contrary party, and by them was appointed to perform that office in their
behalf.


LXXXVII.

    French.

    Apres viendra des extremes Contrées,
    Prince Germain dessus Throsne d’Oré,
    La servitude & les Eaux rencontrées,
    La Dame serve son temps plus n’adoré.

    English.

    After that shall come out of the remote Countreys,
    A German Prince upon a gilded Throne,
    The slavery and waters shall meet,
    The Lady shall serve, her time no more worshipped.

ANNOT.

This Prophecy is concerning Gustavus Adolphus King of Swedeland, who
is called German Prince, because his Ancestors came out of Germany,
he came out of a remote Countrey, that is Swedeland, he came upon a
gilded Throne, that is a Ship gilded, he shall make slavery and waters
meet, because as soon as he was Landed he began to conquer, and to subdue
that Lady (viz. Germania) that was no more worshipped since as she was
before.


LXXXVIII.

    French.

    Le Circuit du grand fait ruineux,
    Le nom septiesme du cinquiesme sera,
    D’un tiers plus grand l’estrange belliqueux,
    De Ram, Lutece, Aix ne garentira.

    English.

    The circumference of the ruinous building,
    The seventh name shall be that of the fifth,
    From a third, one greater, a Warlike man,
    Aries shall not preserve Paris nor Aix.

ANNOT.

The Circumference of that ruinous building, was the French league
against Henry III. and Henry IV. which numbers being joyned together,
make seven, mentioned in the second Verse.

By the strange Warlike man, in the third Verse, is understood Henry
IV. because he was not born in France, but in Navarre, and therefore
called a stranger, who subdued both Paris and Aix, seated under the
constellation of Aries. If you had not rather, by the name of the
Ram, or Aries, understand the Duke of Mayenne, who was head of the
league.


LXXXIX.

    French.

    Un jour seront amis les deux grands Maistres,
    Leur grand pouvoir se verra augmenté,
    La Terre neufue sera en ses hauts estres,
    Au sanguinaire le nombre raconté.

    English.

    One day the two great Masters shall be friends,
    Their great power shall be increased,
    The new Land shall be in a flourishing condition,
    The number shall be told to the bloody person.

ANNOT.

We must suppose here three Kings of Europe, two of which shall become
friends, and by their agreement, the new Land, that is, either the
Plantations, or the Trade either in the East or West Indies, shall
flourish, their prosperities shall be related and told to the third King,
who shall be a bloody and cruel man.


XC.

    French.

    Par vie & mort changé Regne d’Hungrie,
    La loy sera plus aspre que service,
    Leur grand Cité d’Urlemens plaine & crie,
    Castor & Pollux ennemis dans la Lice.

    English.

    By Life and Death the Kingdom of Hungary shall be changed,
    The Law shall be more severe than the service,
    Their great City shall be full of howling and crying,
    Castor and Pollux shall be enemies in the List.

ANNOT.

There shall happen a great change in the Kingdom of Hungary, caused by
the birth of one, and the death of another.

The meaning of the second Verse is, that it will be more tolerable to go
to War, than to Law.

The last verse signifieth, that this dissention shall happen between two
Brothers; because Castor and Pollux were such.


XCI.

    French.

    Soleil levant ungrand feu lon verra,
    Bruit & clarté vers Aquilon tendans,
    Dedans le rond mort & cris lon orra,
    Par Glaive, Feu, Faim, mort les attendans.

    English.

    At the rising of the Sun a great fire shall be seen,
    Noise and light tending towards the North,
    Within the round death and cries shall be heard,
    Death by Sword, Fire, Hunger watching for them.

ANNOT.

These are Prodigies that shall be seen, a little before that a great
Calamity shall happen.


XCII.

    French.

    Feu couleur d’or, du Ciel en terre veu,
    Frappé du haut nay, fait cas merveilleux,
    Grand meurtre humain, prinse du grand Neveu,
    Morts de spectacles, eschapé lorgueilleux.

    English.

    A fire from Heaven of a Golden colour shall be seen,
    Stricken by the high born, a wonderful case,
    Great murder of Mankind, the taking of the great Neveu,
    Some dead looking, the proud one shall escape.

ANNOT.

This is a continuation of the former, relating more Prodigies that are to
happen.


XCIII.

    French.

    Aupres du Tybre bien pres la Lybitine,
    Un peu devant grand Inondation,
    Le chef du nef prins, mis a la sentine,
    Chasteau, Palais en conflagration.

    English.

    Near the Tyber, going towards Lybia,
    A little before a great Innundation,
    The Master of the Ship being taken shall be put into the Sink,
    And a Castle and Palace shall be burnt.

ANNOT.

This is plain.


XCIV.

    French.

    Grand Pau, grand mal par Gaulois recevra,
    Vaine terreur au Maritin Lion,
    Peuple infiny par la Mer passera,
    Sans eschaper un quart d’un Million.

    English.

    Great Pau shall receive great harm by the French,
    A vain terrour shall seize upon the Maritine Lion,
    Infinite people shall go beyond Sea,
    Of which shall not escape a quarter of a Million.

ANNOT.

The first Verse signifieth that the Countrey about the Pau, (which is
the greatest River in Italy) shall receive great damage by the French.

The second, that the Maritine Lion, viz. the Hollanders shall fear in
vain. The third and fourth are plain.


XCV.

    French.

    Les lieux peuplez seront inhabitables,
    Pour Champs avoir grande division,
    Regnes livrez a prudents incapables,
    Lors les grands Freres mort & dissension.

    English.

    The populous places shall be deserted,
    A great division to obtain Fields,
    Kingdoms given to prudents incapable,
    When the great Brothers shall die by dissention.

ANNOT.

This needeth no interpretation.


XCVI.

    French.

    Flambeau ardant au Ciel soir sera veu,
    Pres de la fin & principe du Rhosne,
    Famine, Glaive, tard le secours pourveu,
    La Perse tourne envahir Macedoine.

    English.

    A burning shall be seen by night in Heaven,
    Near the end and beginning of the Rhosne,
    Famine, Sword, too late succours shall be provided,
    Persia shall come against Macedonia.

ANNOT.

This is easie.


XCVII.

    French.

    Romain Pontife garde de taprocher,
    De la Cité que deux fleuves arrouse,
    Ton sang viendras aupres de la cracher,
    Toy & les tiens quand fleurira la Rose.

    English.

    Roman Pontife take heed to come near,
    To the City watered with two Rivers,
    Thou shall spit there thy blood,
    Thou and thine, when the Rose shall blossom.

ANNOT.

Although there may be many Cities watered with two Rivers, yet I know
none more famous than Lions in France, where two famous Rivers, the
Rhosne and the Saone meet together, and I believe this is the place
that our Author forewarneth the Pope to come to, for fear of his death,
and that of his attendants.


XCVIII.

    French.

    Celuy du sang respersé le visage,
    De la Victime proche du Sacrifice,
    Venant en Leo, augure par presage,
    Mis estre a mort alors pour la fiance.

    English.

    He that shall have his face bloody,
    With the blood of the Victim near to be sacrificed,
    The Sun coming into Leo shall be an Augury by presage,
    That then he shall be put to death for his confidence.

ANNOT.

I suppose this to be spoken of a Jewish Priest, who going about to
practice the Ceremonial Law, in a Countrey where it is forbidden, shall
be put to death for his bold confidence.


XCIX.

    French.

    Terroir Romain qu’interpretoit Augure,
    Par gent Gauloise par trop sera vexée,
    Mais Nation Celtique craindra l’heure,
    Boreas, classe trop loing l’avoit poussée.

    English.

    The Roman Countrey in which the Augur did interpret,
    Shall be too much vexed by the French Nation,
    But the Celtique Nation shall fear the hour,
    The Northwind had driven the Navy in too far.

ANNOT.

Since the Reign of Henry the II. King of France, the Historians
do not mention that the Countrey about Rome hath been troubled by
the French Armies. It was only in the time of Paul the IV. who was
assisted by the French Troops, under the conduct of the Lord Strozy,
and Captain Monluc, therefore this Stanza belongeth to the time of that
Kings Reign.

And indeed what he foretelleth here, came to pass in the year 1556.
for the Countrey about Rome was vexed by the French Nation, who
went about then to take the places, which the Duke of Alba had taken
from the Pope, and thereby caused those disorders, which commonly are
incident to War.

The second Verse saith, the Countrey shall be too much vexed, and not a
little, because Monluc, whom the Author calleth the quick Gascon, did
continually torment the Enemies, which could not be done without a great
prejudice to the Countrey; Moreover, his Troops being for the most part
Gascons, and consequently active men; the Soldiers did more harm than
ordinary.

In the first Verse he saith, that this Countrey about Rome was marked
by an Augury, to be the place upon which the sad effect of the Augury
should fall, which proved true; for the first of March 1556, appeared a
Blazing Star, which did presage to that Countrey of Rome, its disaster.

Roman Countrey in which the Augur did interpret, that is to say, which
the Augur did signifie, and presage should be vexed by the French
Nation.

Afterwards the Author saith, that the same French Nation, or
Celtique, shall fear the hour when Boreas should drive to far the
Fleet, that is to say, shall fear much, when the Baron de la Garde
was so troubled with the storm (as we have said) and in truth it was
Boreas, or the Northwind, that drove him into St. Florents road.


C.

    French.

    Dedans les Isles si horrible tumulte,
    Rien on n’orra qu’une bellique brigue,
    Tant grand sera des predareurs l’Insult,
    Qu’on se viendra ranger a la grand ligue.

    English.

    In the Islands shall be so horrid tumults,
    That nothing shall be heard but a Warlike surprise,
    So great shall be the insult of the Robbers,
    That every one shall shelter himself under the great League.

ANNOT.

This is plain, if by the great League, you understand the soundest and
most powerful party.




THE PROPHECIES OF Michael Nostradamus.

CENTURY III.


I.

    French.

    Apres Combat & Bataille Navale,
    Le grand Neptune a son plus haut beffroy,
    Rouge adversaire de peur de viendra pasle,
    Mettant le grand Occean en effroy.

    English.

    After the fight and Sea Battle,
    The great Neptune in his highest Steeple,
    The red adversary shall wax pale for fear,
    Putting the great Occean in a fright.

ANNOT.

I find no mystical sence in this, unless by the red adversary he should
understand the Pope, because clothed in Scarlet. Therefore I leave the
explication to the judgement of every particular Reader.


II.

    French.

    Le Divin Verbe donra a la substance,
    Compris Ciel, Terre, or occult au lait mystique,
    Corps, Ame, Esprit, ayant toute puissance,
    Tant sous ses pieds comme au Siege Celique.

    English.

    The Divine Word shall give to the substance,
    Heaven and Earth, and Gold hid in the mystical milk,
    Body, Soul, Spirit, having all power,
    As well under his feet, as in the Heavenly Seat.

ANNOT.

I desire the judicious Reader, and chiefly if he be given to the
Hermetick Philosophy, to take a special notice of this Stanza, for in
it is contained the secret of the Elixir or Philosophers Stone, more
clearly and plainly then in the Tabula Smaragdina of Hermes, which to
make appearent, we shall expound it Verse by Verse.

The Divine Word shall give to the substance; by the Divine word you
must not understand the second person of the Trinity, but a Doctor in
Divinity or a Theologian, called in Greek θεόλογος or Divine word, who
shall be an Adeptus, a Disciple of Hermes, and one that shall attain
to the secret of the Philosophers stone.

That man shall give to the substance, that is, to Gold; Heaven and
Earth, and gold hid in the mystical Milk. Heaven and Earth, that is all
the Celestial and Terrestrial qualities, lurking in the Gold, which is
hid in the mystical milk, that is in the Azoth, or Mercury of the
Philosophers.

Body, Soul, Spirit, having all Power, that is, the three principles, of
which the Philosophers say their stone is compounded, viz. Body, Soul,
and Spirit.

Having all Power, that is, having the power to transmute all Mettals
into its kind; as also having all the powers from above and below, as
Hermes saith, Pater ejus est ~Sol~, Mater vero ~Luna~, & Terra nutrix
ejus.

Which is confirmed by the last Verse, As well under his feet, as in the
Heavenly Seat.


III.

    French.

    Mars & Mercure, & Largent joint ensemble,
    Vers le Midy extreme siccité,
    Au fond d’Asie on dira Terre tremble,
    Corinthe, Ephese lors en perplexite.

    English.

    Mars and Mercury, and Silver joyned together,
    Towards the South a great drought,
    In the bottome of Asia shall be an Earth-quake,
    Corinth and Ephesus shall then be in perplexity.

ANNOT.

After the Author hath in the foregoing Stanza expressed the mistery
of the Philosophers stone, he seemeth to give here a receit, though
Sophistical, for the relief of the Inquisitors, and as it were a
Viaticum, for them to subsist till they can attain to the perfection,
as Basilius, Valentinus hath done since to his disciples.

He saith then, that with Mars, that is, Iron, Mercury and Silver
joyned together, some thing may be done, if you beware of a drought
in the South; that is, in the middle of the operation; and this is
concerning the two first Verses. Those that shall desire to be better
and further informed, may come to me, and they shall have all the
satisfaction I can afford them.

The two last Verses have no relation to the first two, and foretel onely
a great Earthquake in Asia, by which, those two Towns, Corinth and
Ephesus, shall be in great perplexity.


IV.

    French.

    Quand seront proches le defaut des Lunaires,
    De l’un a lautre ne distant grandement,
    Froid, siccité, dangers vers les frontieres,
    Mesme ou l’Oracle a pris commencement.

    English.

    When the want of the Luminaries shall be near,
    Not being far distant one from another,
    Cold, drought, danger towards the Frontiers,
    Even where the Oracle had his beginning.

ANNOT.

The word near, sheweth that the two Eclipses, one of the Sun and the
other of the Moon, shall be near one another.

The Ephemerides of John Stadius, teach us, that in the year 1556 in the
Month of November, these two Eclipses did meet. That of the Sun upon
the first of November, at 17 hours (as the Astrologers reckon) and 53
Minutes. That of the Moon at 12 hours and 43 Scruples; and thus the two
last Verses are plain.

Concerning the other two: Belleforest teacheth us two things; the
first, that the same year was extraordinary dry, in so much that from
April to October it did not rain, but only upon the Eve of St. John
the Baptist, and that the Vintage was made in August, the Wine proving
excellent. The second is, that in the Month of December began a horrid
Frost, which lasted a great while. Thus there was Cold and drought.

Concerning the dangers towards the Frontiers, Belleforest saith, that
towards Pickardy the Spaniard began to break the truce, making
inrodes about Abbeville, St. Spirit of Rue, la Chapele, Rozoy,
Thierasse, and Aubenton.

When complaints were made of it, they alledged their necessity and want
of Victuals; which did oblige the Lord Admiral to permit the Souldiers
retaliation; and in this manner, there was danger towards the Frontiers.

As for the Town where the Oracle (that is, our Author) had his
beginning or birth, whether it be that of St. Remy or Salon de Craux.
The dangers that were there, proceeded from the Civil Wars between the
Protestants and the Roman Catholicks.


V.

    French.

    Pres le defaut des deux grands luminaires,
    Qui surviendra entre l’Avril & Mars,
    O quel cherté! mais deux grands debonnaires,
    Par Terre & Mer secourront toutes parts.

    English.

    Near the Ecclipses of the two great Luminaries,
    Which shall happen between April and March,
    O what a dearth! but two great ones bountiful,
    By Land and Sea shall succour them on all sides.

ANNOT.

There shall happen two great Ecclipses between March and April, one
of the Sun, and the other of the Moon; then shall be a great dearth, but
the afflicted shall be relieved by the two powerful Princes of a good
Nature.


VI.

    French.

    Dans Temple clos le foudre y entrera.
    Des Citadins dedans leur fort grevez,
    Chevaux, Bœufs, Hommes, l’Onde mur touchera,
    Par faim, soif, soubs les plus foibles armez.

    English.

    Into a close Church the lightning shall fall,
    The Citizens shall be distressed in their Fort,
    Horses, Oxen, Men, the Water shall touch the Wall,
    By hunger, thirst, down shall come the worst provided.

ANNOT.

This is plain.


VII.

    French.

    Les fugitifs, feu du Ciel sur les Piques,
    Conflit prochain des Corbeaux sesbatans,
    De Terre on crie, aide, secours Celiques,
    Quand pres des murs seront les combatans.

    English.

    The runaways, fire of Heaven upon the Pikes,
    A fight near hand, the Ravens sporting,
    They cry from the Land, succours O Heavenly powers
    When near the walls shall be the fighting men.

ANNOT.

The first Verse signifieth, that there shall be some Fugitives, upon
whose Pikes the Lightning shall fall.

The second, that when a multitude of Ravens shall be sporting, a great
fight shall be near hand.

The third, that there shall be a great exclamation and prayers, when the
Souldiers shall come near the wall to give an assault.


VIII.

    French.

    Les Cimbres joints avecques leurs voisins,
    Depopuler viendront presque l’Espagne,
    Gens ramassez, Guienne & Limosins,
    Seront en ligue & leur feront Compagne.

    English.

    The Cimbres joyned with their neighbours,
    Shall come to depopulate almost all Spain,
    People gathered from Guienna and Limosin,
    Shall be in league with them, and keep them Company.

ANNOT.

The Cimbres and Teutons were a Northern people, viz: the Swedes
and Danes, who came once out of their Countrey to sack Rome, and were
overcome by Marius, near the Town of Orenge, in a place where his
Triumphal Arch is seen to this day. The rest is easie.


IX.

    French.

    Bourdeaux, Rouan & la Rochelle joints,
    Tiendront autour la grand Mer Occeane,
    Anglois Bretons, & les Flamans conjoints,
    Les chasseront jusque aupres de Rouane.

    English.

    Bourdeaux, Rouan, and Rochel joyned together,
    Will range about upon the great Ocean,
    English Brittans, and Flemings joyned together,
    Shall drive them away as far as Rouane.

ANNOT.

By mentioning Bourdeaux, Rouan, and Rochel, the Author
understandeth the whole Naval forces of France, which (he saith) shall
be defeated, by the English, Brittains, and Hollanders, and pursued
as far as Rouane, which is a Town at the head of the River Loire,
from whence it runneth down for the space of 500 Miles to Nantes, and a
while after dischargeth it self into the Ocean.


X.

    French.

    De sang & faim plus grand calamité,
    Sept fois sapreste a la Marine plage,
    Monech de faim, lieu pris, captivité,
    Le grand mené, Croc, enserré en cage.

    English.

    Of blood and famine, what a great calamity!
    Seven times is ready to come upon the Sea Coast,
    Monech by hunger, the place taken, captivity,
    The great one carried away, Croc, shut up in a Cage.

ANNOT.

Monech or Monaco is a Town and Principality belonging to the
Family of the Grimaldi of Genua, and is seated by the Sea side,
between Provence and Genoa; that place is threatned here with many
afflictions, as is plain in this Stanza.


XI.

    French.

    Les Armées battre au Ciel longue saison,
    L’Arbre au milieu de la Cité tombé,
    Vermine, Rogne, Glaive en face tison,
    Lors le Monarque d’Adrie succombé.

    English.

    Armies shall fight in the Air a great while,
    The tree shall fall in the middle of the City,
    Vermin, Scabs, Sword, fire-brand in the face,
    When the Monarck of Adria shall fall.

ANNOT.

The three first Verses contain several prodigies, that shall happen
before the death of the Duke of Venice, or rather (because he is no
Monarck) before the fall of that Monarchy or Common-wealth.


XII.

    French.

    Par la tumeur du Heb. Po. Tag. Tibre de Rome,
    Et par lestang Leman & Aretin,
    Les deux grands chefs, & Citez de Garonne,
    Prins, Morts, Noiez. Partir humain butin.

    English.

    By the swelling of Heb. Po. Tag. Tiber of Rome,
    And by the Lake Leman and Aretin,
    The two great Heads, and Cities of Garonne,
    Taken, Dead, Drowned. The human booty shall be divided.

ANNOT.

Heb. is the River Hebrus in Thracia, Po, is the great River of
Italy, Tag. is Tagus, the River of Lisbonne; the rest is plain.


XIII.

    French.

    Par Foudre en Arche Or & Argent fondu,
    De deux Captifs l’un l’autre mangera,
    De la Cité le plus grand estendu,
    Quand submergée la Classe nagera.

    English.

    By Lightning shall gold and silver be melted in the Arch,
    Of two Prisoners one shall eat up the other,
    The greatest of the City shall be laid down,
    When the Navy that was drowned shall swim.

ANNOT.

The words and the sense are plain.


XIV.

    French.

    Par le Rameau du vaillant personage,
    De France infirme, par le Pere infelice,
    Honeurs, Richesses, travail en son viel Age,
    Pour avoir creu le conseil d’homme nice.

    English.

    By the Bow of the valliant men,
    Of weak France, by the unfortunate Father,
    Honours, Riches, labour in his old age,
    For having believed the councel of a nice man.

ANNOT.

Every body may understand this as well as I do.


XV.

    French.

    Cœur, vigueur, gloire, le Regne changera,
    De tous points contre, ayant son adversaire,
    Lors France enfance par mort subjuguera,
    Un grand Regent sera lors plus contraire.

    English.

    Heart, vigour, and glory shall change the Kingdom,
    In all points, having an adversary against it,
    Then shall France overcome Childhood by death,
    A great Regent shall then be more adversary to it.

ANNOT.

The two first Verses seem to have foretold of the late Tyrant Cromwel.

The two last Verses may be applied to France, when the Infant of
Spain Don Balthazar died, &c.


XVI.

    French.

    Un Prince Anglois Mars a son cœur du Ciel,
    Voudra poursuivre sa fortune prospere,
    Des deux duelles l’un percera le fiel,
    Hay de luy, bien aymé de sa Mere.

    English.

    An English Prince Mars hath his heart from Heaven,
    Will follow his prosperous fortune,
    Of two Duels one shall pierce the gall,
    Being hated of him, and beloved of his Mother.

ANNOT.

By this Stanza is promised to England a Martial Prince, who shall have
his heart from Heaven, and with all endeavours follow his prosperous
fortune, which is a remarkable and commendable part in a man.

By the last two Verses, it seemeth that this Prince shall have a Son, who
shall fight two duels, for one of which his Father shall be angry and
hate him, but his Mother shall love him for it.


XVII.

    French.

    Mont Aventine brusler nuit sera veu,
    Le Ciel obscur tout a un coup en Flandres,
    Quand le Monarque chassera son Neveu,
    Lors gens d’Eglise commettront les esclandres.

    English.

    Mount Aventine shall be seen to burn in the night,
    The Heaven shall be darkned upon a sudden in Flanders,
    When the Monarch shall expel his Neveu,
    Then Churchmen shall commit scandals.

ANNOT.

Mount-Aventine is one of the seven Mountains in Rome. The rest is
plain.


XVIII.

    French.

    Apres la pluye de lait assez longuette,
    En plusieurs lieux de Rheims le Ciel touché,
    O quel conflit de sang pres deux lapreste,
    Pere & Fils Rois, noseront approché.

    English.

    After a pretty long rain of Milk,
    In many places of Rhemes the lightning shall fall,
    O what a bloody fight is making ready near them,
    Father and Son, both Kings, shall not dare to come near.

ANNOT.

Rhemes is a City in France. The rest is easie.


XIX.

    French.

    En Lucques sang & lait viendra pleuvoir,
    Un peu devant changement de Preteur,
    Grand Peste & Guerre, Faim & soif sera voir,
    Loin ou mourra leur Prince Recteur.

    English.

    In Luca it shall rain Blood and Milk,
    A little before the change of the Magistrate,
    A great Plague, War, Hunger and Thirst shall be seen,
    A great way off, where their Prince Ruler shall die.

ANNOT.

Luca at present is a strong Town, and a little Common-wealth by it self
in Italy, governed by their own Magistrate: That Town is threatned here
to see those prodigies mentioned, a little before the change of their
Government, besides a great Plague and dearth; as also the death of their
chief Magistrate, who shall die far off that Countrey.

As for the raining Milk and Blood, they are Prodigies that have
appeared often before, and therefore not incredible, as those that are
Versed in History may justifie: and although the reasons may be drawn
from natural causes, yet would they be too tedious if I should insert
them here.


XX.

    French.

    Par les Contrées du grand flevue Betique,
    Loin d’Ibere, au Royaume de Grenade,
    Croix repoussées par gens Mahometiques,
    Un de Cordube trahira a la fin Contrade.

    English.

    Through the Countreys of the great River Betis,
    Far from Iberia, in the Kingdom of Granada,
    Crosses beaten back by Mahometan people,
    One of Corduba shall at last betray the Countrey.

ANNOT.

The great River, called in Latine Betis, and in Spanish Guadalquivir,
is the River of Sevilia, the most famous Town in Spain for Trade.
This River runneth through most of the Spanish Dominions, and
dischargeth it self into the Ocean about the mouth of the Straights,
over against Barbary, upon which Coast of Spain lyeth the Kingdom of
Granada, the chief City of which is Corduba, in Spanish Cordua.
This Kingdom was of time almost immemorial, occupied and inhabited by
the Moores, till they were expelled and driven back into Barbary, by
Ferdinand and Isabella, King and Queen of Castilia. The rest is
easie.


XXI.

    French.

    Au Crustamin pres Mer Adriatique.
    Apparoistra un horrible poisson,
    De face humaine & de corps aquatique,
    Qui se prendra dehors de l’Hamecon.

    English.

    In the Crustamin near the Adriatick Sea,
    An horrid Fish shall appear,
    Having a mans face, and a fishes body,
    Which shall be taken without a hook.

ANNOT.

I suppose this Crustamin to be some place so called, near the
Adriatick Sea.

As for Fishes with an humane face, we have several examples of them.
Ambrosius Paræus relateth divers, and in his works hath inserted the
Pictures of them.

1. When Mena was Governour of Ægypt, and walked by the Nilus side,
he saw a Sea-man rising out of the River, having an humane shape as far
as the Navel, and with a grave look and fair hairs, intermixed with white
ones, bony Breast, and distinct Arms, the rest of the body was like a
Fish. Three days after in the Morning appeared another Sea-monster like a
woman: those two Monsters appeared so long, that every body had time to
consider them.

2. Rondeletius saith, that in our age was taken a Fish in the Sea
of Norway, which every body presently called a Monk, because of the
resemblance.

3. In the year 1531. was seen a Sea-monster, covered with Scales, which
for the resemblance was called a Bishop, Rondeletius and Gesuerus
have the Picture of it.

4. In the year 1523. was seen in Rome a Fish about the bigness of a
Child of five years old, that had humane shape to the Navel, except the
ears: So that all those things related of Tritons, Nereides and
Sirens seem not altogether fabulous, and we may conclude with Pliny:
Vera est vulgi opinio, quicquià nascatur in parte naturæ ulla, & in
Mariesse, præterque multa quæ nusquam alibi, lib. 9. cap. 2.


XXII.

    French.

    Six jours lassaut devant Cité donné,
    Livrée sera forte & aspre Bataille,
    Trois la rendront, & a eux pardonné,
    Le reste a feu & sang trauche taille.

    English.

    Six days shall the assault be given to the City,
    A great and fierce Battle shall be fought,
    Three shall surrender it and be pardoned,
    The rest shall be put to fire and sword, cut and slasht.

ANNOT.

Some famous City must be here understood, which the Author hath not
named. The same shall be assaulted for six days continually, and in
conclusion shall be surrendred or betrayed by three men, who shall
be pardoned, and all the rest put to Fire and Sword. Most men that
have knowledge in History, interpret this of the City of Magdebourg
in Germany, that was destroyed with Fire and Sword by the Earl of
Tilly, General for the Emperour against Gustavus Adolphus, King of
Swedeland. For the like devastation and cruelty was never heard of in
Europe.


XXIII.

    French.

    Si France passe outre Mer Liquistique,
    Tu te verras en Isles & Mers enclos,
    Mahomet contraire plus Mer l’Adriatique,
    Chevaux & Asnes tu rongeras les os.

    English.

    If France goeth beyond the Ligustick Sea,
    Thou shall see thy self inclosed with Islands and Seas,
    Mahomet, against thee besides the Adriatick Sea,
    Of Horses and Asses thou shalt gnaw the bones.

ANNOT.

This is concerning the miseries which the French were to suffer in the
Island of Corsica, till the peace was concluded in the year 1559. The
Author directeth his speech to the French Fleet that went to Corsica
in the year 1555.

He saith in the first Verse, If France goeth beyond the Ligustik Sea;
that is, if thou goest to Corsica, which is beyond the Ligustik Sea
towards Africa. Thou shalt see thy self enclosed with Islands and
Seas; that is, thou shalt be constrained to keep within those two Towns
which thou hast there, without going out either by Land or Sea; not by
Sea for want of Ships, nor by Land the Garrisons being weak, because the
King had then so much business that he could not suffice all.

Moreover the Author addeth that Mahomet shall be contrary; not that
he was an Enemy to France, but because he was then Master of the
Adriatick Sea; so that the Venetians, which were then friends to the
French, could not succour them.

And thus the news of the peace being brought, the French did eat their
Horses and Asses, and there was never a peace so well come as to the
French that were in Corsica.


XXIV.

    French.

    De l’Entreprise grande confusion,
    Perte de gens Thresor innumerable,
    Tu ny doibs faire encore tension,
    France a mon dire fais que sois recordable.

    English.

    From the undertaking great confusion,
    Loss of people and innumerable Treasury,
    Thou oughtest not yet to tend that way,
    France endeavour to remember my saying.

ANNOT.

This is annexed and hath relation to the precedent, therefore needeth no
other interpretation.


XXV.

    French.

    Qui au Royaume Navarrois parviendra,
    Quand la Sicile & Naples seront joints,
    Bigorre & Landes par Foix lors on tiendra,
    D’Un qui d’Espagne sera par trop conjoint.

    English.

    He that shall obtain the Kingdom of Navarre,
    When Sicily and Naples shall be joyned,
    Bigorre and Landes then by Foix shall beheld
    Of one who shall too much be joyned to Spain.

ANNOT.

Bigorre is a Town in Gascony, the Landes is a desert Countrey about
Bourdeaux wherein nothing groweth but Pine-Trees, Foix is a Country
of Gascony, called the County, of Foix. The rest is easie.


XXVI.

    French.

    Des Rois & Princes dresseront simulachres,
    Augures, creux eslevez aruspices:
    Corne victime dorée, & d’Azur & de Nacre,
    Intrepretez seront les extispisces.

    English.

    Some Kings and Princes shall set up Idols,
    Divinations and hollow raised Divinators,
    Victim with gilded Horns, and set with Azur and Mother of Pearl
    The looking into the Entrals shall be interpreted.

ANNOT.

I can find nothing in this but a description of the Heathens sacrifices
in ancient times, where they brought the Victim, that is, the beast
that was to be sacrificed, trimmed in a gallant manner, having the
Horns gilded, and set with Azure and Mother of Pearl, and after the
Entrals were taken out, by the inspection of them they practised their
Soothsaying. This inspection of Entrals was called by the Latines
Extispicium, from the word Exta which signifieth Entrals, and
specto which signifieth to look.


XXVII.

    French.

    Prince Libique puissant en Occident,
    Francois d’Arabe viendra tant enflammer,
    Scavant aux Lettres sera condescendent
    La Langue Arabe en Francois translater.

    English.

    A Libian Prince being powerful in the West,
    The French shall love so much the Arabian Language,
    That he being a Learned man shall condescend,
    To have the Arabian tongue translated into French.

ANNOT.

This Prophecy is de Futuro, and is concerning a Libian Prince
(now Libia is a Kingdom of Africa) who shall be a powerful man in
the West, and being a lover of learning shall condescend to have the
Arabian Language translated into French, because the French at that
time shall be much in love with it.


XXVIII.

    French.

    De Terre foible & pauvre parentale,
    Par boute & paix parviendra a l’Empire,
    Long temps regner une jeune femelle,
    Qu’oncques en Regne nen survint un si pire.

    English.

    One weak in Lands and of poor Kindred,
    By thrusting, and peace shall attain to the Empire,
    Long time shall Reign a young woman,
    Such as in a Reign was never a worse.

ANNOT.

The words are so plain, that every body may interpret them.


XXIX.

    French.

    Les deux Neveux en divers lieux nourris,
    Navale pugne, Terre peres tombez,
    Viendront si haut eslevez aguerris,
    Venger l’Injure ennemis succombez.

    English.

    The two Nephews brought up in divers places,
    A Sea fight, fathers fallen to the Earth,
    They shall came highly educated, and expert in Arms,
    To avenge the injury, their enemies shall fall down under them.

ANNOT.

This is concerning two Nephews, who shall be educated in divers places,
and grow expert in Arms, their Fathers shall be killed, but those
Nephews shall come, and having fought at Sea, shall revenge the injury
done to them, overcoming their enemies.


XXX.

    French.

    Celuy qu’en luitte & fer au fait Bellique,
    Aura porte plus grand que luy le prix,
    De nuit au lit six luy feront la pique,
    Nud sans harnois subit sera surprins.

    English.

    He who in Wrestling and Martial affairs,
    Had carried the prize before his better,
    By night Six shall abuse him in his bed,
    Being naked, and without harness, he shall suddenly be surprised.

ANNOT.

Many attribute this to the Earl of Montgomery in France, who having
run a tilt against Henry II. unfortunately killed him, for which, and
for being of the Protestant party, he was afterwards beheaded, though
quarter had been given him.


XXXI.

    French.

    Aux Champs de Mede, d’Arabe, & d’Armenie,
    Deux grands Copies trois fois sassembleront,
    Pres du Rivage d’Araxes la mesgnie,
    Du grand Soliman en Terre tomberont.

    English.

    In the fields of Media, Arabia, and Armenia,
    Two great Armies shall meet thrice,
    Near the Shore of Araxes, the people
    Of great Solyman shall fall down.

ANNOT.

This signifieth no more, but the loss of three famous Battles on the
Turks side, against the Persians.

The first that I find after the coming out of these Prophesies, is the
Battle of Sancazan, seven miles from Tauris, and hard by the River
Araxes, where 20000 Turks were slain, without any considerable loss
of the Persians; this was in the time of Amurath the III. Emperour
of the Turks, and son to Selyman the second. The other two Battles
I could not make good, because I want the supplement of the Turkish
History, as also because they have not yet happened.


XXXII.

    French.

    Le grand sepulchre du peuple Aquitanique,
    S’aprochera aupres de la Toscane,
    Quand Mars sera pres du coin Germanique,
    Et au terroir de la gent Mantuane.

    English.

    The great grave of the Aquitanick people,
    Shall come near Tuscany,
    When Mars shall be in the German corner,
    And in the Territory of the Mantuan people.

ANNOT.

The Lord of Thou saith in his History, that the Cardinal Caraffa got
by the King of France’s permission, out of Corsica, several Troops
of Gascons, and brought some with them, to the number of about 2000
which were quartered about Rome. Many of them were among the Troops of
the Duke of Guise, being allured thither by the reputation of their
Countreyman Captain Monluc.

The Author foretelleth, that they shall find their Graves near Tuscany,
because the Territory of Rome joyneth to that Province.

Then in the 3 and 4 Verse he specifieth the time by two marks; one is,
when ~Mars~ shall be near the German corner; the other, when he shall
be in the Territory of the Mantuan people, and the War was then in that
Territory; for the Duke of Ferrara to shew he would not stand still,
sent his son Alphonso d’Este to make incursions there, and to take some
places.

Moreover the War was then near the German corner, which is Lorrain,
when Henry II. besieged Thionville in the year 1558. Paradin
sheweth, that Mars was in the German corner two years before, sith
about the end of the year 1555; the Duke of Nevers by an extraordinary
endeavour in the middle of the Winter, did relieve Mariembourg: and
the following years the French Garrisons kept the fields to avoid
surprises. And in the year 1557. when the Duke of Guise fought in
Italy, the Duke of Savoy brought his Army against Mariembourg; so
it proved true that Mars, viz. the War was in the German corner;
for that Town is in the borders of Germany, and was in that corner till
the taking of Thionville.


XXXIII.

    French.

    En la Cité ou le loup entrera,
    Bien pres de la les ennemis seront,
    Copie estrange grand pais gastera,
    Aux Monts des Alpes les amis passeront.

    English.

    In the City wherein the Wolf shall go,
    Near that place the enemies shall be,
    An Army of strangers shall spoil a great Countrey,
    The friends shall go over the Mountains of the Alpes.

ANNOT.

The two last Verses make me think that this Prophesie was fulfilled in
the time of Henry II. King of France, because the French being then
friends to the Pope, went over the Alpes to serve him.

This Stanza might also be applyed to Lewis 13, who caused his Army to
go beyond the Alpes, but that word Friends is more convenient to the
time of Henry II. because the French went then over the Alpes in
quality of friends to serve the Pope.

According to this conjecture, the wolf which signifieth the Spaniard,
came anno 1556. into many Towns, which the Duke of Alba took, as we
have said in another place, and because among those Towns Neptune was
one of the most considerable, being seated by the Sea side near Rome: I
believe that by this word City he meaneth that Town which belonged to
the Colonese.

And to say truth, the French were then very near it, to endeavour the
relief of it.

Afterwards came the Duke of Guise’s Army, which is named by the Author,
an Army of strangers, because the French and Germans are strangers
to Italy. This Army shall spoil a great Countrey; for in that year it
went through all Italy, and where an Army passeth, nothing but ruine
can be expected.


XXXIV.

    French.

    Quand le defaut du Soleil lors sera,
    Sur le plein jour le Monstre sera veu,
    Tout autrement on l’Interpretera,
    Cherté na garde, nul ny aura pourveu.

    English.

    When the Ecclipse of the Sun shall be
    At noon day, the Monster shall be seen,
    It shall be interperted otherways,
    Then for a dearth, because no body hath provided against it.

ANNOT.

The sense of this is, that when the Sun shall be Eclipsed at noon, a
Monster shall be born, which shall presage a dearth, though no body will
believe it, because they were unprovided against it.


XXXV.

    French.

    Du plus profond de l’Occident d’Europe,
    De pauvre gens un jeune enfant naistra,
    Qui par sa langue seduira grande troupe,
    Son bruit au Regne d’Orient plus croistra.

    English.

    Out of the deepest part of the West of Europe,
    From poor people a young child shall be born,
    Who with his tongue shall seduce many people,
    His fame shall increase in the Eastern Kingdom.

ANNOT.

This needeth no explication.


XXXVI.

    French.

    Ensevely non mort Apoplectique,
    Sera trouvé avoir les mains mangees,
    Quand la Cité damnera l’Heretique,
    Qu’avoit leur Loix ce leur sembloit changees.

    English.

    One buried, not dead, but Apoplectical,
    Shall be found to have eaten up his hands,
    When the City shall blame the heretical man,
    Who as they thought had changed their Laws.

ANNOT.

Many persons (according to Histories being only in a fit of Apoplexy)
have been buried for dead, and being afterwards taken out of the ground,
have been found to have eaten up their hands, as I my self have seen one
digged out of Saint Bartholomews Church-yard, about the time that the
City of London began to be weary of Cromwels devices and Tyranny, yet
I would not here definitively assert, he was the man here pointed at by
the Title and Epithete of Heretical man, unless it were in the point of
government.


XXXVII.

    French.

    Avant l’assault l’Oraison pronouncée,
    Milan prins l’Aigle, par embusche deceus,
    Muraille antique par Canons enfonsée,
    Par feu & sang a mercy peu receus.

    English.

    Before the assault the Prayer shall be said,
    An Eagle shall take a Kite, they shall be deceived by an Embuscado.
    The ancient wall shall be beaten down with Canons,
    By fire and blood, few shall have quarter.

ANNOT.

The sense of this is easie.


XXXVIII.

    French.

    La gent Gauloise & Nation estrange,
    Outre les Monts, morts pris & profligez,
    Au mois contraire & proche de vendange,
    Par les Seigneurs en accord redigez.

    English.

    The French Nation, and another Nation,
    Being over the Mountains, shall die, and be taken,
    In a month contrary to them, and near the vintage,
    By the Lords agreed together.

ANNOT.

Two kind of Nations were led into Italy by the Duke of Guise to
succour the Pope, viz. French and Germans, meaning by the Germans
all those that use the German Tongue, as Switzers, &c.

The Author saith, these two Nations were led beyond the Mountains,
because they went beyond the Apennine Alpes, to come down into the
Champion Countrey of Italy, where some of them died by the Sword,
others by famine and sickness; others lost their liberty, being made
prisoners of War, others were exposed to the inconveniences that attend a
ruined Army. He addeth, that these accidents shall befall them in a Month
near the Vintage, that Month is September: He calleth it Contrary,
because the Grapes being ripe, the starved Souldiers did eat abundance of
them, and so fell into a bloody flux. The Pope’s Tenants made use of
this Stratagem to ruine that Army.

The Spaniard had his revenge the year following, for the Duke of
Guise having missed his design, and being stept before Civitella,
and incensed that the Pope did not keep his word with him, he resolved
to go back again into France, and so the Pope did by the means of
the Common-wealth of Venice, and of the Duke of Florence, it was
concluded and signed with the 23 of September.

This is the Authors meaning in the 4 Verse, that all the misfortune
which befell the French, was by reason of that peace; for the Pope
disbanded his Troops, consisting most of French and Switzers, the
greatest part of whom fell into the hands of their enemies, and of the
Countrey people, others died of sickness. It is true, that the Duke of
Guise brought his own Army back without much loss, but the Author
speaketh here of the Gascons and Switzers, that were in the Pope’s
service, under the command of Marshal Strozzy, Monluc, Cardinal
Caraffa, and others.

The time of this peace agreeth with the Prophesie, for it was concluded
on the 23 of September, which is a Month near the Vintage.


XXXIX.

    French.

    Les sept en trois Mois en concorde,
    Pour subjuger les Alpes Apeninnes,
    Mais la tempeste & Ligure coüarde,
    Les profligent en subites ruines.

    English.

    The seven shall agree together within three Months,
    To conquer the Apennine Alpes,
    But the tempest, and coward Genoese,
    Shall sink them into sudden ruines.

ANNOT.

There shall be seven persons, who shall be three Months in making an
agreement to go beyond the Apennines, but they shall be hindred by a
tempest, and by the cowardliness of the Genoeses.


XL.

    French.

    Le grand Theatre se viendra redresser,
    Les dez jettez & les rets ia tendus,
    Trop le premier en glaz viendra lasser,
    Par arc prostrais de long temps ia fendus.

    English.

    The great Theatre shall be raised up again,
    The Dice being cast, and the nest spread,
    The first shall too much in Glass.
    Beaten down by Bows, who long before were split.

ANNOT.

This must be put among Insolubilia de Alliaco.


XLI.

    French.

    Bossu sera esleu par le Conseil,
    Plus hideux Monstre en Terre napperceu,
    Le coup volant luy crevera un œil,
    Le traistre au Roy pour fidele receu.

    English.

    Crook-back shall be chosen by the Councel,
    A more hideous Monster I never saw upon Earth.
    The flying blow shall put out one of his eyes,
    The Traitor to the King, shall be admited as faithful.

ANNOT.

This needs no explication.


XLII.

    French.

    L’Enfant naistra a deux dents en la gorge,
    Purres en Tuscie par pluie tomberont,
    peu d’ans apres ne sera Bled ny Orge,
    pour saouler ceux qui de faim failleront.

    English.

    A Child shall be born with two Teeth in his mouth.
    It shall rain stones in Tuscany,
    A few years after there shall be neither Wheat nor Barley
    To feed those that shall faint for hunger.

ANNOT.

Those two Prodigies mentioned in the two first Verses, do presage a great
Famine that shall ensue a few years after.


XLIII.

    French.

    Gens d’alentour du Tar, Lot, & Garonne,
    Gardez les Monts Apennins de passer,
    Vostre tombeou pres de Rome & d’Ancone,
    Le noir poil crespe fera Trophée dresser.

    English.

    People that live about the Tar, Lot, and Garonne,
    Take heed to go over the Apennine Mountains,
    Your Grave is near Rome and Ancona,
    The black frisled hair shall dress a Trophy of you.

ANNOT.

The Tar, the Lot, and the Garone, are three Rivers of Gascony,
the Inhabitants of which are forewarned not to go over the Apennine
Mountains, or else they shall meet with their Graves near Rome and
Ancona. This hath relation to the 38 Stanza, and to the interpretation
thereof, therefore vide.


XLIV.

    French.

    Quand l’Animal a l’Homme domestique,
    Apres grands peines & sauts viendra parler,
    Le foudre a vierge sera si malefique,
    De Terre prinse & suspendue en l’Air.

    English.

    When the Beast familiar to Mankind,
    After great labour, and leaping shall come to speak,
    The Lightning shall be so hurtful to a Virgin,
    That she shall be taken from the Earth, and suspended in the Air.

ANNOT.

It is a Dog that shall come howling and leaping to his Mistresses
friends; because she was killed and suspended in the Air by the Lightning.


XLV.

    French.

    Les cinq estranges entrez dedans le Temple,
    Leur sang viendra la Terre prophaner,
    Aux Thoulousain sera bien dur exemple,
    D’un qui viendra ses loix exterminer.

    English.

    The five strangers having come into the Church,
    The blood shall prophane the ground,
    It shall be a hard example to those of Thoulouse,
    Concerning one that came to break their Laws.

ANNOT.

I suppose these five strangers to be five Commissioners, for the
altering something in the Government of Thoulouse, who shall be all
killed in a Church, and the ground prophaned by their blood, according to
the Romish opinion.


XLVI.

    French.

    Le Ciel (de Plancus la Cité) nous presage,
    Par clercs insignes & par estoiles fixes,
    Que de son change subit saproche lage,
    Ne pour son bien, ne pour ses malefices.

    English.

    The Heaven foretelleth concerning the City of Plancus,
    By famous Clerks, and fixed Stars,
    That the time of her sudden change is near hand,
    Neither because of her goodness, or wickedness.

ANNOT.

The City of Plancus is Lion, because he was the Founder of it. That
City is threatned here of a sudden change, caused neither by her goodness
or wickedness, but by a certain position and aspect of the fixed Stars,
which makes it fatal.


XLVII.

    French.

    Le vieux Monarque dechassé de son Regne,
    Aux Orients son secours ira querre,
    Pour peur des Croix ploiera son Enseigne,
    En Mitylene ira par Mer & par Terre.

    English.

    The old Monarch being expelled out of his Kingdom,
    Shall go into the East to get succours,
    For fear of the Crosses he shall fold up his Colours,
    He shall go into Mitylene by Sea and Land.

ANNOT.

Mitylene is an Island of the Archipelago, belonging to the Turk.


XLVIII.

    French.

    Sept cens Captifs attachez rudement,
    Pour la moitie meurtrir, donné le sort,
    Le proche espoir viendra si promptement,
    Mais non si tost qu’une quinziesme mort.

    English.

    Seven hundred prisoners shall be tied together,
    To murder half of them, the lot being cast,
    The next hope shall come quickly,
    And not so quickly, but fifteen shall be dead before.

ANNOT.

By the next hope, he meaneth the reprieve. The rest is clear.


XLIX.

    French.

    Regne Gaulois tu seras bien changé,
    En lieu estrange est translaté l’Empire,
    En autre mœurs & Lois seras rangé,
    Rouan & Chartres te feront bien du pire.

    English.

    French Kingdom thou shalt be much changed,
    The Empire is translated in another place,
    Thou shalt be put into other manners and Laws,
    Rouan and Chartres shall do the worse they can to thee.

ANNOT.

Rouan is the chief City of the Province of Normandie, and Chartres
the chief City of that of Beausse.


L.

    French.

    La Republique de la grande Cité,
    A grand rigueur ne voudra consentir,
    Roy sortir hors par Trompette Cité,
    L’Eschelle au Mur la Cité repentir.

    English.

    The Common-wealth of the great City,
    With great harshness shall not consent,
    That the King should go out being summoned by a Trumpet,
    The Ladder shall be put to the Wall, and the City repent.

ANNOT.

It is hard to know what he meaneth by the great City wherein there is a
Common-wealth, whether it be Venice, Genoa, Geneva, Luca, or some
of the Cities of Switzerland; but it seemeth that a King shall take
shelter in it, who shall be summoned by a Trumpet to come out, but the
City will not suffer it, for which the said City shall be scaled, and
repent.


LI.

    French.

    Paris conjure un grand meurtre commettre,
    Blois le fera sortir en plein effet,
    Ceux d’Orleans voudront leur Chef remettre,
    Angers, Troyes, Langres, leur seront un mes fait.

    English.

    Paris conspireth to commit a great murder,
    Blois will cause it to come to pass,
    Those of Orleans will set up their head again,
    Angers, Troyes, Langres will do them a mischief.

ANNOT.

The Prophecy contained in the two first Verses came to pass in the time
of Henry the III. King of France, when the Parisians did rebel
against him, and made Barricadoes in the streets, thinking to have taken
him, who was compelled to run away for his life, and fly to Chartres.
This rebellion was raised and fomented by Henry of Lorraine Duke
of Guise, whom the King afterwards caused to be murdered, with his
brother the Cardinal of Lorraine, at the Convention of the three
Estates kept at Blois.

Orleans, Angers, Troyes, Langres, are remarkable Cities in
France.


LII.

    French.

    En la Campagne sera si longue pluye,
    Et en l’Apoville si grande siccité,
    Coq verra l’Aigle l’aisle mal accomplie,
    Par Lion mise sera en extremité.

    English.

    In Campania shall be so long a rain,
    And in Apulia so great a drought,
    The Cock shall see the Eagle with his wing disordered,
    And by the Lion brought to extremity.

ANNOT.

Campania, and Apulia are two Provinces of the Kingdom of Naples.

The last two Verses of the Prophecy came to pass about the years 1630 and
1631. when Gustavus Adolphus King of Swedeland, called here the Lion,
brought the Empire (signified by the Eagle) to extremity; the King of
France signified by the Cock, looking upon, and underhand assisting him.


LIII.

    French.

    Quand le plus grand emportera le prix,
    De Nuremberg, d’Ausbourg, & ceux de Basle,
    Par Agripine Chef de Frankfort repris,
    Traverseront par Flandres jusqu’en Gale.

    English.

    When the great one shall carry the prize,
    Of Nuremberg, Ausbourg, and Basil,
    By Agrippina the Chief of Frankfort shall be taken,
    They shall go through Flanders as far as France.

ANNOT.

Nuremberg, Ausbourg, and Basil are Cities of Germany.

By Agrippine is understood the City of Cologne, called in Latine
Colonia Agrippina, from the Founderess of it Agrippina, Mother of the
Emperour Nero, or from M. Agrippa favourite of Augustus Cæsar.


LIV.

    French.

    L’un des plus grands fuira aux Espagnes,
    Qu’en longue playe apres viendra seigner,
    Passant Copies par les hautes Montagnes,
    Devastant tout, & puis apres regner.

    English.

    One of the greatest shall run away into Spain,
    That shall cause a wound to bleed long,
    Leading Armies over the high Mountains,
    Destroying all, and afterwards shall Raign.

ANNOT.

This is so plain, that it needeth no interpretation.


LV.

    French.

    En l’an qu’un œil en France Regnera,
    La Cour sera en un bien fascheux trouble,
    Le grand de Blois son amy tuera,
    Le Regne mis en mal & doubte double.

    English.

    In the year that one eye shall Reign in France,
    The Court shall be in a very hard trouble,
    The great one of Blois shall kill his friend,
    The Kingdom shall be in an ill case, and double doubt.

ANNOT.

The meaning of the first Verse is, when a King having but one eye shall
Reign in France.

Blois is a City in France upon the River Loire.


LVI.

    French.

    Montauban, Nismes, Avignon & Besier,
    Peste, Tonnerre & Gresle a fin de Mars,
    De Paris Pont, de Lion Mur, Monpelier,
    Depuis six cens & sept vingt, trois parts.

    English.

    Montauban, Nismes, Avignon and Besier,
    Plague, Lightning and Hail at the end of March,
    The Bridge of Paris, the Wall of Lion, and Monpelier, shall fall,
    From six hundred and seven score, three parts.

ANNOT.

Montauban is a Town in Gascony, Nismes and Besiers are Towns in
Languedoc; Avignon is a Town in France belonging to the Pope, which
shall suffer these damages by Lightning at the end of March.


LVII.

    French.

    Sept fois changer verrez gens Britanique,
    Teints en sang en deux cens nonante an,
    France non point par appuy Germanique,
    Aries double son Pope Bistarnan.

    English.

    Seven times you shall see the English to change,
    Died in blood, in two hundred ninety year,
    Not France, by the German support,
    Aries doubleth his Bastarnan Pole.

ANNOT.

The two first Verses concern England; the third France; the fourth
marketh the time by the motion of the Sign of Aries, which shall be
favourable to France.

We shall leave the two first Verses to be interpreted by the English
Nation, which is most concerned in it, and come to the last two, which
concern France.

The third Verse saith that France shall not change as England, by
reason of the help it shall have from Germany, which hath been made
good already for these hundred years, notwithstanding the Wars between
Henry II. and the Spaniard; the Conspiracy of the Protestant party
against Francis the II. at Amboise; the civil Wars under Charles
the IX. the League under Henry III. and Henry IV. the Forrain Wars
under Lewis XIII. and Lewis XIV. now Reigning.

The Authors meaning by these words, but France not, is, you shall not
see France change seven times in two hundred ninety years, as the
Brittish nation, and then he giveth the reason of it, by German help,
that is to say, that France shall have help from Germany.

The fourth Verse saith, that during those two hundred ninety years,
Aries doubleth his Bastarnan Pole, to understand this, we must suppose
first that the Sign of Aries ruleth over France, Palestine,
Bastarnia, &c.

Secondly, we must learn from Ptolomy and other Geographers, that
Bastarnia containeth the people that are towards Sarmatia or
Poland, which were called by the Ancients, the people of Admone,
Sidane, Roxolane, and by others Peucins, from the Island Peuce,
which is in Istria.

Thirdly, we must suppose, that the Sign of Aries hath two Poles, the
first is that of the Æquinoctial Line, and the second, that of the
Eccliptick, because the Sign of Aries beginneth just in the Line of
the Equator, and afterwards stretcheth towards the North. Now it is so
that the place where its extension endeth in the Eccliptical Line of the
Sun, is called by the Author the Bastarnan Pole.

It is a Pole sith in the constellations of Heaven, we call Poles,
the two ends or extremities of them, and in the constellations of the
Zodiack, we call the first Pole that which is next to the Equator, and
the second Pole that which stretcheth towards the North, or towards the
South in the Eccliptical Line.

In this sense, the first Pole of the Sign of Aries, is that which hath
its first degree in the Equator; the second is, that which stretcheth
towards the North in the Eccliptick, and this last Pole is called
Bastarnan, because it is Vertical to Bastarnia, as the Astrologers
set down their Climates, Kingdoms, Provinces and Towns under the twelve
Signs.

Fourthly, We must suppose that this word to double, may signifie three
things. 1. In Sea-mens tearms; it signifieth to go beyond some place,
as to double the Cape of bona Speranza, which is called in Italian,
Tramontare; that is, to go beyond. 2. It signifieth to do twice the
same thing, as Jacob did double his service for Rachel, &c. 3. In
matter of traveling; it signifieth to go twice as far as is requisite.

To double, in this place cannot be understood in the first sense;
because the constellations never stretcht out of their compasses, though
the Stars of which they are compounded, have their peculiar motions.

To understand this, we must know that the Stars of the Firmament
have their peculiar motions from West to East, upon the Pole of the
Eccliptick, and that they go that way a matter of one Degree, in the
space of about 100 years, and consequently the Stars do retrograde
every year in the Eccliptick from West to East 52 Seconds. Ptolomeus
holdeth this opinion, but other renowned Astrologers give them more:
For my part I am of Tychobrahe’s opinion, who allowed them one Degree
of retrogradation in 70 years and 7 Months, and consequently 51 Seconds
every year.

According to this Doctrine the Star that is in the Horn of Aries, was
observed by Tymocharis in 2d Degree; 150 years after, Hipparchus
observed it in the first; 265 years after, Ptolomeus saw it in the 6
Degree; 740 years after, Albathognius observed it in the 18 Degree; 304
years after, Alphonsus King of Spain, found it in the 6 Degree; 265
years after, Copernicus did observe it to be in the 27 Degree and two
Minutes; 61 years after, Tychobrahe saw it in the 27 Degree, and above
37 Minutes; so that in the space of 61 years it had gone 35 Minutes.

By this Doctrine we see that the whole constellations do not go beyond
their Poles, though the Stars that Compound them change their Poles every
year of 51 Seconds.

To double, then here cannot be taken in the first sense, nor in the third
sense, for the first reason, it must then be in the second sense; and
thus Aries doubleth his Bastarnan Pole; that is, Aries maketh twice
his Pole, which answereth to Bastarnia.

If you ask how it cometh to pass that Aries doubleth this Pole, and
in what place of Heaven we set this Bastarnan Pole. I answer to the
first, that Aries doubleth his Pole, when one of those 13 Stars cometh
to that point, which is a Northern or Western Pole to that sign in the
Eccliptick. As to the second: I answer, that the place ought to be its
last Degree, viz. the end of the 30 Degree.

Why? (will you say) did the Author mark that difference of the Sign of
Aries, rather than that of Taurus, or of another?

I answer, that it was in favour of France; because Aries doth govern
in France, and if it hath been favourable to it, when it came first to
the Bastarnan Pole, it will be so too when it doubleth the same Pole,
seeing that it will have the same position and Aspect. Now we see, that
in the space of these 100 years, France was not overcome, much less
shall it be hereafter, seeing that the Stars do promise its exaltation
for a long continuance.

If I were a great Astrologer, I should observe exactly by this, that
within the space of 290 years, Aries shall double his Cape Bastarnan,
and consequently Aries should come to that Pole just in the year 1845.
which is according to that we have said.


LVIII.

    French.

    Aupres du Rhin des Montagnes Noriques,
    Naistra un grand de gens trop tard venu,
    Qui defendra Sarmates & Pannoniques,
    Qu’on ne scaura quil sera devenu.

    English.

    Near the Rhine, out of the Norick Mountains,
    Shall be born a great one, though too late come,
    Who shall defend the Polonians and Hungarians,
    So that it shall not be known what is become of him.

ANNOT.

This is plain.


LIX.

    French.

    Barbare Empire par le tiers usurpé,
    La plus grand part de son sang mettre amort,
    Par mort senicle par luy quart frappé,
    Pour peur que sang par le sang ne soit mort.

    English.

    A Barbarian Empire shall be usurped by a third person,
    Who shall put to death the greatest part of his Kindred,
    By death of old age, the fourth shall be stricken by him,
    For fear that blood should not die by blood.

ANNOT.

The two first Verses are plain, I acknowledge my Ignorance in the last
two.


LX.

    French.

    Par toute Asia grande proscription,
    Mesme en Mysie, Lydie, & Pamphilie,
    Sang versera par dissolution,
    D’un jeune noir remply de felonie.

    English.

    Through all Asia shall be a great proscription,
    Yea in Mysia, Lydia, and Pamphilia,
    Blood shall be spilled by the debauchness
    Of a young black man, full of felony.

ANNOT.

Mysia, Lydia, and Pamphilia, are Countreys of Asia.


LXI.

    French.

    La grande bande & secte Crucigere,
    Se dressera en Mesopotamie,
    Du proche Fleuve compagnie legere,
    Qui telle Loy tiendra pour ennemie.

    English.

    The great troop and sect wearing a Cross,
    Shall rise up in Mesopotamia,
    Near the next River shall be a light company,
    Which shall hold that law for enemy.

ANNOT.

It is an Army of Christians (be like Armenians) that shall rise in
Mesopotamia against whom shall an Army of Turkish Horseman come, who
did live by the next River.


LXII.

    French.

    Proche del Duero par Mer Cyrene close,
    Viendra percer les grands Monts Pyrenees,
    La main plus courte & sa percée gloses
    A Carcasonne conduira ses menées.

    English.

    Near the Duero closed by the Cyrenian Sea,
    Shall come to pierce the great Pyrenean Mountains,
    The shorter hand and his pierced glose,
    Shall in Carcassone lead his plot.

ANNOT.

The Cyrenian Sea, is that Sea which is by the Province of Cyrene. The
Pyrenean Mountains part Spain from France. Carcassonne is a Town
in France near unto Spain. The rest passeth my understanding.


LXIII.

    French.

    Romain pouvoir sera du tout a bas,
    Son grand Voisin imiter les vestiges,
    Occultes haines civiles, & debats,
    Retarderont aux boufons leur folies.

    English.

    The Roman power shall be quite put down,
    His great Neighbour shall follow his steps,
    Secret and civil hatreds and quarrels,
    Shall stop the Buffons folly.

ANNOT.

The first Verse signifieth, that the Pope’s Authority shall be put down.

The second, that his great neighbour, that is the Empire shall follow his
steps, that is, be put down too. The two last Verses are plain.


LXIV.

    French.

    Le Chef de Perse remplira grand Olchade,
    Classe trireme contre gent Mahometique,
    De Parthe & Mede & piller les Cyclades,
    Repos long temps au grand Port Jonique.

    English.

    The Head of Persia shall fill a great Olchade,
    A Fleet of Galleys against the Mahometan Nation,
    From Parthia and Media they shall come to plunder the Cyclades,
    A long rest shall be on the Jonique Port.

ANNOT.

I could not find what he meaneth by Olchade. The second Verse is plain.

Parthia and Media are two Kingdoms depending from that of Persia.
The Islands of Cyclades are in the Ægean Sea, and are so called
because they are like a Garment about the City of Delos, for κυκλας in
Greek signifieth a round garment of a woman.

The Jonique Sea is that Sea in Grecia, which is about Athens and
Corinth, &c.


LXV.

    French.

    Quand le Sepulchre du grand Romain trouvé,
    Le jour apres sera esleu Pontife,
    Du Senat gueres il ne sera prouvé,
    Empoisonné, son sang au Sacre Scyphe.

    English.

    When the Sepulcher of the great Roman shall be found,
    The next day after a Pope shall be elected,
    Who shall not be much approved by the Senate,
    Poisoned, his blood in the Sacred Scyphe.

ANNOT.

This seemeth to foretel the finding out of the Sepulcher of some famous
Roman, and that the next day after a Pope shall be Elected, who being
not well approved of by the Conclave, shall be poisoned in the Chalice,
which is the Communion Cup that the Roman Catholicks use at Mass,
signified here by the Latine word Scyphus.


LXVI.

    French.

    Le grand Baillif d’Orleans mis a mort.
    Sera par un de sang vindicatif,
    De mort merite ne mourra, ne par sort,
    Des pieds & mains mal, le faisoit captif.

    English.

    The great Bailif of Orleans shall be put to death,
    By one of a revengeful blood,
    He shall not die of a deserved death, nor by chance,
    But the disease of being tied hand and foot, hath made him prisoner.

ANNOT.

The Bailif of Orleans is a great Officer, for he is there Lord Chief
Justice, and of all the precincts. It seemeth that this man shall be put
to death, by one of a revengeful blood, not that he had deserved it, or
come to it by chance, but because he shall be tied hand and foot, and die
in prison.


LXVII.

    French.

    Une nouvelle Secte de Philosophes,
    Mesprisant mort, or, honneurs & richesses,
    Des Monts Germains seront fort limitrophes,
    A les ensuivre auront appuy & presses.

    English.

    A new Sect of Philosophers shall rise,
    Despising Death, Gold, Honours and Riches,
    They shall be near the Mountains of Germany,
    They shall have abundance of others to support and follow them.

ANNOT.

This is properly said of the Anabaptists in Germany, in the time of
John de Leyden, and now of the Quakers in England, and elsewhere.


LXVIII.

    French.

    Peuple sans Chef d’Espagne & d’Italie,
    Morts, profligez dedans le Cheronese,
    Leur dict trahy par legere folie,
    Le sang nager per tout a la traverse.

    English.

    A people of Spain and Italy without a Head,
    Shall die, being overcome in the Cheronese,
    Their saying shall be betrayed by a light folly,
    The blood shall swim all over at random.

ANNOT.

Cheronese is a Land or ground unmanured; the rest is plain.


LXIX.

    French.

    Grand exercite conduit par jouvenceau,
    Se viendra rendre aux mains des ennemis,
    Mais le vieillard nay au demy pourceau,
    Fera Chalon & Mascon estre amis.

    English.

    A great Army led by a young man,
    Shall yield it self in the hands of the enemies,
    But the old man born at the sign of the halfe-Hog,
    Shall cause Chalon and Mascon to be friends.

ANNOT.

The two first Verses are plain; as for the third Verse, I could not find
who that Old man should be, that shall be born at the sign of the
half-Hog.

Chalon and Mascon are two Cities in France, the first in
Champagne, the last in Burgundy.


LXX.

    French.

    La grand Bretagne comprise d’Angleterre,
    Viendra par eaux si haut a inondre,
    La Ligue nevue d’Ausone fera gerre,
    Que contre eux ils se viendront bander.

    English.

    Great Britany comprehended in England,
    Shall suffer so great an Inundation by Waters,
    The new League of Ausone shall make Wars,
    So that they shall stand against them.

ANNOT.

This Prophecie is divided in two parts. The first two Verses foretel a
great Innundation, that was to happen in England.

The last two speak of a league and insurrection, that shall be at
Bordeaux, which is here called Ausone, from a famous Latine Poet,
named Ausonius, who was born in that City.

As to the first part, after much seeking and enquiry: I found the truth
of it in a Latine book, called Rerum in Gallia, Belgia, Hispania,
Anglia, &c. gestarum anno 1607. Tomi septimi Liber secundus conscriptus a
~Nicolao Gotardo~ Artus Dantiscano, where the History is related thus.

About the end of January 1607 the Sea broke out so violently in
England, that after the breaking of Fences and Dikes, it caused very
great damages to the Inhabitants. The greatest mischief was done in
Somersetshire, where the water did overflow, ten Leagues in length,
and two in breadth, twelve foot high in the most eminent places. This
sudden Innundation brought a fearful alarm to the Countrey people; some
of them going to their Plough, were fained to run back to their houses,
where they found their enemies at their doors, viz. Death and Water,
who without distinction swept them away. In a little time, the Towns
appeared like Islands, encompassed on all sides, and presently after
were swallowed up, so that the tops of the Trees were scarce seen. This
new Flood covered so the Towns of Hansfield, in the same County, those
of Grantham, Kenhus, Kingston, and Briandon, with several Farms
built in the Champion Countrey, that none of the Buildings could be seen.
If you add to this the devastation of the places, the quantity of Corn,
Fruit, and Grass that was lost, the misery shall be so great, as not to
be expressed. During this fearful quarrel between the Water and the Land,
an exceeding great number of people died of all Ages, and Sexes, it would
avail them nothing to get into the upper Stories and Roofs of houses,
nor upon the highest Trees; for the imperious Waters did so swell and
rage, that the Foundations of the houses, and roots of the Trees were
loosened, so that both fell to the Ground, or rather into the Water. The
people seeing no way to escape, resolved to die patiently. No body could
without great grief see the Oxen and Sheep drowning; for there was such a
numerous quantity of them, that afar off one would have thought them to
be Rocks in the Sea, but seeing them swiming, and hearing them bleating
and bellowing, one would have thought them to be a storm and hissing of
winds. A rich Farmer, and father of seven Children, being involved in the
Flood, and much astonished at this accident, nevertheless thinking the
danger less then it was, went about to save some of his best Goods; but
seeing the Waters to increase, he forsook all, and went to save one of
his Children, whom he loved best; but the Waters followed him so close,
that all he could do, was to get upon the Roof of his house. Among the
Children there was a little one sleeping in a Cradle, which being made of
close boards, did swim upon the Waters about three Miles, and was taken
up alive, and sound. The Hay-cocks did swim like Ships upon the Waves,
the Pigeons and Pigs were upon the Sheaves that the Water carried away.
The Coneys being driven out of their holes, had leapt upon the backs of
the swiming Sheep. A certain Shepheard being about to gather his Sheep
into their Fold, was followed by the Flood, ran for his life, and climbed
upon a high Tree, where seeing his Sheep bleating in the water, he began
to tear his hair, to smite his breast, to lift up his hands and his eyes
to Heaven, and when his Sheep had all perished, and himself endured an
extream cold and hunger, he was at last taken up in a Boat that was sent
to save the distressed.

But here we must talk of Bristol, which is one of the chiefest Cities
in England, by reason of the Haven, which bringeth thither abundance of
Merchants, from several Nations. The same day of that Inundation, the Sea
breaking into a great Channel, did presently overflow the Countrey with
such quickness and violence, that it covered the Valleys, and the smaller
Hills, in so much that nothing but an utter ruine was expected; many
whole houses were turned upside down, and carried away with the Flood.
The Barns full of Corn, Hay, and Straw, were overthrown, and the Cattle
carried away, besides abundance of people of all sorts. The Merchants
of London and Bristol, and the rest of the Inhabitants, besides the
loss of Provisions, suffered an inestimable one in their Commodities,
which they had provided for the Fair, that was then near hand, the most
part of them being carryed away by the Flood, and the rest so spoiled,
that the owners could not tell what to do with them. A Gentleman dwelling
between Barnstable and Bristol, and two Leagues off from the Sea,
being gone abroad in the Morning to oversee his grounds, did look towards
the Sea, ran back again to his house, to bring this sad news to his Wife
and Servants, while they were endeavouring to pack up the most precious
of their Goods, the Water came about the house so fast, that they altered
their resolution, and bethought themselves only to save their lives;
the servants busied themselves about tying the Goods together, thinking
the Water could not have carryed them away. As for the Gentleman, he
went with his Wife and Children to the top of the house, and got upon
the rafters of the Roof. Although nothing appeared to them but the
Image of death; nevertheless some hope and desire of escaping, made
the Gentleman come down to save a little Trunk, wherein his papers of
greatest concernment were. Being come down from the Rafter, he laid hold
of the Trunk, and fastened it to a Manger; while he was busie about it,
the Waves of the Sea did so beat against that house, that it fell down
to the Ground. The Wife, Children, and Servants were swallowed up in the
ruine. The Gentleman laid hold on a Rafter, and was carryed away with it
above half a League further, to a Mountain, where he set his foot upon
dry Ground, being half dead with fear and grief, and bewailing the loss
of his Wife, Children, and Servants, he spyed the little Trunk and the
Manger, which he drew to Land, and that was all he saved, besides his
Life.

Another Gentleman living thereabouts, and newly married, was resolved
that day to go to the next Town, and make merry with some friends,
whereupon he bid his man make his Horse ready, and himself went to put on
his Boots; after he had put on one, and whilst he held the other in his
hand, the Waters came so fiercely into that house, that they compelled
the half Booted Gentleman to run away for his life, in an upper Chamber,
but he was followed so close by that merciless Element, that he was
fained to get upon the top of the Roof, to save his life, and to ride
upon the upper Rafter, but the house and Roof melting by the violence of
the Waves, this new Knight was carryed by the violence of them towards
the Town where he intended to make merry, and there was saved with much
adoe.

It happened at the same time near Markand, in the Dutchy of Norfolk,
that two Thieves, going about to steal some Cattle, while they were
driving of them, perceived in the Morning the Justice of God following
them; it was the Water, which having overtopped the Dikes, threatned the
takers of being taken, and compelled them to save themselves with all
speed. From their wickedness did arise a great good; for to the next Town
they went, and bid the Sexton to Ring the Bell, and to cry Water, Water:
The Inhabitants being for the most part asleep, did not know what to do
in such an Alarm: Some climbed into the Church’s Steeple; others thinking
there were Thieves went about to fence and defend their houses; others
hearing of a Flood, laughed at it, and said, that those who brought
this News, deserved to be punished; but presently they altered their
Languages, and their laughing was turned into a fearful mourning, every
one flying to save himself, his Wife, and Children, and whatsoever they
could pack up of their most precious Goods. Some thinking to have more
wit than others, went about to divert the Current of the Water from their
houses; but seeing there was no remedy, they went with their Wives and
Children to the tops of their houses, in a lamentable fright.

But when the Water came to seize upon the houses, wherein there were some
Playing, some Drinking, others already Drunken, a great part of them were
drowned, others ran to a Hill near the Town, where they spent the rest of
that night, and the day following with great lamentations.

The next day they saw their houses half under Water, and many people,
who from the windows and Steeples cryed for help; others endeavoured to
save themselves upon Boards and Rafters; the Horses tyed to the Manger
were all suffocated. The Cattle in the fields, were by this time driven
to the Mount called Truhill, and for all that, were not out of danger;
for the Mountain was encompassed with Water to such a heighth and depth,
that without Boats there was no access to it; chiefly because of the
Thickets and Bushes. Thus so much Cattle was about to perish, had not
some Shepherds brought Boats loaded with provisions for Men and Beasts,
till the Waters retired again, and the Dikes were made good.


LXXI.

    French.

    Ceux dans les Isles de long temps assiegez,
    Prendront vigueur force contre ennemis,
    Ceux par dehors morts de faim profligez,
    En plus grand faim que jamais seront mis.

    English.

    Those in the Islands that have been long besieged,
    Shall take vigour and force against their enemies,
    Those without shall die for hunger; being overcome,
    They shall be put in greater famine then they were before.

ANNOT.

This Prophecy came to pass when the Spaniards Besieged Leyden in
Holland, for the Dutch broke the Dikes, whereby the water came upon
them so fast, that they were more besieged and starved then those of the
Town, and their Army wholly destroyed. Read Cardinal Bentivoglios his
History of the Low-Countreys, as also Strada.


LXXII.

    French.

    Le bon Vieillard tout vis Ensevely,
    Prez du grand Fleuve par faux soupcon,
    Le nouveaux vieux de richesse ennobly,
    Prins en chemin tout l’or de la Rancon.

    English.

    The good old man shall be buried alive,
    Near the great River by a false suspicion,
    The new old one made noble by his riches,
    The gold of his ransom shall be taken in the way.

ANNOT.

This Prophecy is divided into two parts: the two first Verses are
concerning an old man that shall be buried alive near a great River, upon
a false suspition.

The latter two are concerning a young man, who shall assume unto himself
the name of a noble Family, and so make himself noble by his riches, but
being afterward taken prisoner, the money that was sent for his Ransom,
shall be taken in the way.


LXXIII.

    French.

    Quand dans le Regne parviendra le boiteux,
    Competiteur aura proche Bastard,
    Luy & le Regne viendront si fort rogneux,
    Qu’ains quil guerisse son fait sera bien tard.

    English.

    When the lame man shall attain to the Kingdom,
    He shall have a Bastard for his near competitor,
    He, and his Kingdom shall be so scabby,
    That before he be cured it will be late.

ANNOT.

The words and the sense are plain.


LXXIV.

    French.

    Naples, Florence, Fayence & Imole,
    Seront en termes de telle fascherie,
    Que pour complaire au malheureux de Nole,
    Plaint d’avoir fait a son Chef moquerie.

    English.

    Naples, Florence, Fayenza, and Imola,
    Shall be put into so much distress,
    For being complaisant to the unhappy one of Nola,
    Who was complained of for having mocked his Superiour.

ANNOT.

Naples, Florence, Fayenza, Imola and Nola are all Cities in
Italy; the rest is plain.


LXXV.

    French.

    Pau, Verone, Vicence, Saragousse,
    De Glaive atteints, Terroirs de sang humides,
    Peste si grande viendra a la grand gousse,
    Proche secours & bien long les remedes.

    English.

    Pau, Verona, Vicenza, Saragossa,
    Shall be hit by the Sword, the Countrey shall be moist with blood,
    So great a plague and so vehement shall come,
    That though the succours be near, the remedy shall be far off.

ANNOT.

By Pau here are understood the Towns that are seated upon that River.

Verona, Vicenza, are two Cities in Italy, belonging to the
Venetians. Saragossa is a City in Sicily.


LXXVI.

    French.

    En Germanie naistront diverses Sectes,
    Saprochant sort de l’heureux Paganisme,
    Le cœur captif & petites receptes,
    Feront retour a payer le vray disme.

    English.

    In Germany shall divers Sects arise,
    Coming very near the happy Paganism,
    The heart captivated and small receivings,
    Shall open the gate to pay the true Tithes.

ANNOT.

The first and second Verses have been verified sufficiently.

By the two last Verses, he meaneth that the heart of everyone shall be
in fear, so that they shall come to an agreement, which the true Tithes
shall be paid, and every one come to his own again.


LXXVII.

    French.

    Le tiers climat soubs Aries comprins,
    L’An mil sept cens vingt sept en Octobre,
    Le Roy de Perse par ceux d’Ægypte prins,
    Conflict, mort, perte, a la Croix grand opprobre.

    English.

    The third Climat comprehended under Aries,
    In the year 1700. the twenty seven of October,
    The King of Persia shall be taken by those of Ægypt,
    Battle, death, loss, a great shame to the Christians.

ANNOT.

Here be three notable things to be observed: one is the plain and
punctual specification of the time, in which the Prophecy shall come to
pass, viz. the 7. of October in the year 1700. The second is, that
the King of Persia shall be taken by those of Ægypt. The third is,
the shame and confusion that the Christians shall suffer for the same.


LXXVIII.

    French.

    Le Chef d’Escosse avec six d’Allemagne,
    Par gents de mer Orientaux captif,
    Traverseront le Calpre & Espagne,
    Present en Perse au nouveau Roy craintif.

    English.

    The Chief of Scotland with six of Germany,
    Shall be taken prisoners by Seamen of the East,
    They shall go through the Calpre and Spain,
    And shall be made a present in Persia to the new fearful King.

ANNOT.

By the Calpre is understood the Capzor promontory, which is at the
mouth of the Streights, by and beyond which these Prisoners will be
carried into Persia for a present to the King, who then shall be some
fearful person.


LXXIX.

    French.

    Le grand criard sans honte audacieux,
    Sera esleu Governeur le d’Armée,
    La hardiesse de son contentieux,
    Le pont rompu, Cité de peur pasmée.

    English.

    The great bawler proud without shame,
    Shall be elected Governour of the Army,
    The stoutness of his Competitor,
    The Bridge being broken, the City shall faint for fear.

ANNOT.

Paradin saith, that in the year 1558. the Lord of Bonnivet being
dead, the King of France did chuse Francis of Vendosme, Vidame of
Amiens, to succeed the said Bonnivet, in the Office of Colonel of the
French Foot. This Vidame is noted by all Historians, for a rash proud
man, that had a good opinion of himself, and found fault with all the
commands of the Marshal of Brissac, then General of the Army.

The King in consideration of his Birth, and that he was a good Souldier,
gave him the place of the Lord Bonnivet, according to what the Author
saith, The great Bawler, ~&c.~ shall be elected Governour in the Army.
If you ask in what Army he was elected Governour, the third Verse
answereth, in the Army of his Competitor, that is, the Marshal of
Brissac, who did chide him severely for disobeying his commands, and
was like once to have killed him.

The fourth Verse proved true at the taking of Queiras, where the
Bridge, through which the succours came to relieve the Town, being
broken, the Town grew so fearful, that it surrendred it self to the
Marshal of Brissac.


LXXX.

    French.

    Erins, Antibe, villes auteur de Nice,
    Seront vastées fort par Mer & par Terre,
    Les Sauterelles Terre & Mer vent propice,
    Prins, morts, troussez, pillez, sans loy de guerre.

    English.

    Erins, Antibe, and the Towns about Nices,
    Shall be destroyed by Sea and Land,
    The Grashopers shall have the Land, the Sea, and Wind favourable,
    They shall be taken, killed, thrust up, plundered, without Law of War.

ANNOT.

Erins and Antibe are Towns of Provence, bordering upon Nice,
which is a Town of Piemont, all that Coast is threatned here to be
ruined by the Grashopers, that is, the Turks, which fell out about the
year 1558. for the King of France having called the Turks to his
succours against Charles V. Emperour, they came and took Nice in the
behalf of the French, where they committed unheard cruelties, as also
upon all that Coast.


LXXXI.

    French.

    L’Ordre fatal sempiternal par chaisne,
    Viendra tourner par ordre consequent,
    Du Port Phocen sera rompue la chaine,
    La Cité prinse, l’ennemy quant & quant.

    English.

    The fatal and eternal order by chain,
    Shall come to turn by consequent order,
    Of Port Phocen the chain shall be broken,
    The City taken, and the enemy presently after

ANNOT.

This Prophecy regardeth onely the City of Marseilles, which is the most
famous Port Town that the French have upon the Mediterranean Sea,
and which was anciently a Greek Colony, peopled by the Phocen Seas.
This City is threatned here to have the chain of her Port broken, and to
be taken by her enemies, and the said enemies to be a little while after
taken in it.


LXXXII.

    French.

    Du Regne Anglois le digne dechassé,
    Le Conseiller par ire mis a feu,
    Ses adherans iront si bas tracer,
    Que le bastard sera demy receu.

    English.

    From the English Kingdom the worthy driven away,
    The Councellor through anger shall be burnt,
    His partners shall creep so low,
    That the bastard shall be half received.

ANNOT.

This is one of those Prophecies that concern the English Nation, and
which by its event, hath made this Book and the Author thereof famous,
for nothing can be more plain to the meanest capacity, then the sense and
words of these four Verses.

By the first, is meant the Kings most excellent Majesty Charles II.
now Reigning, who being the true Heir to the Kingdom, and most worthy to
rule, was driven out of the Kingdom by a rebellious rout of his Subjects.

The second Verse expresseth, the punishment inflicted upon the
Councellors and Abettors of so hainous a crime, who were most of them
hanged, drawn and quartered, their entrals burnt.

The third Verse, signifieth the low estate of the Abettors of that
pernicious Councel.

The fourth Verse, is understood that bastard Faction, which was like to
supplant Cromwel, upon the division of the Army.


LXXXIII.

    French.

    Les longs cheveux de la Gaule Celtique,
    Accompagnez d’Estranges Nations,
    Mettront captif l’Agent Aquitanique,
    Pour succomber a leurs intentions.

    English.

    The long hairs of the Celtian France,
    Joyned with forrain Nations,
    Shall put in prison the Aquitanick Agent,
    To make him yield to their intentions.

ANNOT.

The Celtan France is that part of France included between the River
Loire, and that of Scheld in Flanders. they are called here the
long hairs; because in antient time they used to wear long hairs.


LXXXIV.

    French.

    La grand Cite sera bien desolée,
    Des habitans un seul n’y demoura,
    Mur, Sexe, Temple, & Vierge violée,
    Par Fer, Feu, Peste, Canon, peuple mourra.

    English.

    The great City shall be made very desolate.
    Not one of the Inhabitants shall be left in it,
    Wall, Sex, Church, and Virgin ravished,
    By Sword, Fire, Plague, Canon, people shall die.

ANNOT.

This is concerning the Town of St. Quentin, which was taken by the
Spaniards in the year 1557. upon the 27 of August, and 17 days after
the Battle of St. Laurence, it was taken by assault, and all the
Inhabitants put to the Sword.


LXXXV.

    French.

    La Cité prinse par tromperie fraude,
    Par le moyen d’Un bean jeune attrapé,
    Assaut donné, Raubine pres de Laude,
    Luy & touts morts pour avoir bien trompé.

    English.

    The City shall be taken by cheat and deceit,
    By the means of a fair young one caught in it,
    Assault shall be given, Raubine near Laude,
    He, and all shall die, for having deceived.

ANNOT.

It is a City that shall be taken by the cheat and deceit of a young fair
man, who himself shall be taken in his craft.

The difficulty lyeth in the third Verse, viz. what he meaneth by
Raubine and Laude. I could find nothing by transposition of Letters:
therefore I suppose the Author had a mind to reserve the exposition to
himself, and to one that should be clearer sighted than I.


LXXXVI.

    French.

    Un chef d’Ausonne aux Espagnes ira,
    Par Mer, sera arrest dedans Marseilles,
    Avant sa mort un long temps languira,
    Apres sa mort on verra grand merveille.

    English.

    A chief man of Ausone shall go into Spain
    By Sea, he shall stay at Marseilles,
    He shall languish a great while before his death,
    After his death great wonders shall be seen.

ANNOT.

Here is nothing obscure but the word Ausone, by which is meant the City
of Bordeaux, so named by the Author every where, for having brought
forth that famous Latine Poet, and Counsul of Rome, Ausonius.


LXXXVII.

    French.

    Classe Gauloise naproche de Corsegne,
    Moins de Sardaigne tu ten repentiras,
    Tretous mourrez frustrez de laide Greigne,
    Sang nagera, captif ne me croiras.

    English.

    French Fleet do not come near unto Corsica,
    Much less to Sardinia, thou shalt repent of it,
    All of you shall die frustrate of the help Greigne,
    Blood shall swim, being Captive thou shalt not believe me.

ANNOT.

The Baron of la Garde coming from Rome, where he had carryed
the Cardinals of Tournon and Lorrain, received order to go into
Corsica, to relieve with ammunition the two Towns, that the French
kept still in possession in that Island, Glasse and St. Boniface,
which after the general peace made at Cambray, anno 1559. were
restored to the Common-wealth of Genoa. When he was coming near the
Island, there arose such a storm, that they were constrained to go as
near land as they could, viz. in St. Florents, till the storm was
over.

At the same time, by reason of the said storm, eleven Ships loaded with
six thousand Spaniards, going for Italy, took shelter in the same
place, a good way off from the said Baron.

At the first, the Spanish Ships did not spie the French Galleys, but
the Baron de la Garde discovered the Spaniards, and bid his Galleys
to set upon them. Two of the Spanish Ships were taken, in which were
1200. or 1500. Spaniards, part of which were drowned, and the rest made
slaves.

The Baron chased the rest, but the storm so scattered them, that the nine
escaped.

Before this encounter the Genoese Captain, Andrew d’Oria, took all
the Island from the French, Anno 1553. and kept it ever since, by
sending continual supplies. On the other side, the King of France sent
supplies by the Lord of Termes, to those that were retired in the
Island of Glasse.

One time among the rest, about the latter end of the year 1555. there was
sent a notable supplie from the French, to which the Author speaketh
now in these tearms.

French fleet do not come near unto ~Corsica~, nor Sardinia, which is
another Island near Corsica. The third Verse giveth the Reason of it;
ye shall die, being frustrated of the help ~Greigne~. Greigne is the
Provencal Language, which was the Maternal one of our Author, signifieth
a Galley: The sense therefore is this, you shall be frustrate of the help
of the Galleys, that are under the command of the Baron de la Garde,
who carryed unto you men, money, and ammunition; because he shall be then
in pursute of the Spanish fleet, that were scattered by a storm.

In the mean time Blood shall swim in the fight of the Baron de la
Garde, and thou, poor Prisoner in that Island, Thou shalt not believe
me; those slaves were they, which went in the year 1555. And the Author
saying, Thou shalt not believe me, sheweth, that being very famous in
Provence, for his Prophecies, the General of the Army had asked him
concerning the success of his Journey, and that he did warn him not to
undertake it; but having an express command from the King, his Master, he
would need go. Therefore he saith, Poor prisoner thou shalt not believe
me. We find in this work many examples of those, who went to consult
with the Author concerning the success of their undertakings, as did
the Earl of Sommerive, before the besieging of Bagnole, to whom he
answered, that he should leave the Trees loaded with a new kind of fruit,
that is to say, of the Rebels, whom he caused to be hanged on Trees.


LXXXVIII.

    French.

    De Barcelone par Mer si grande Armée,
    Toute Marseille de frayeur tremblera,
    Isles saisies, de Mer aide fermeé,
    Ton traditeur en Terre nagera.

    English.

    There shall come from Barcelona by Sea so great a fleet,
    That Marseilles shall quake for fear,
    The Islands shall be seized, the help by Sea shut up,
    Thy Traitor shall swim to Land.

ANNOT.

Barcelona is a Town in Spain, upon the Mediterranean Sea;
Marseilles is another in France, upon the same Sea. The rest is
easie.


LXXXIX.

    French.

    En ce temps la sera frustrée Cypre,
    De son secours, de ceux de Mer Ægée,
    Vieux trucidez mais par Mesles & Lipre,
    Seduit leur Roy, Roine plus outragée.

    English.

    At that time Cyprus shall be frustrated
    Of its succours, of those of the Ægean Sea,
    Old ones shall be killed, but by Mesles and Lipre,
    Their King shall be seducted, and the Queen more wronged.

ANNOT.

The two first Verses are plain, the two last have need of an Oedipus.


XC.

    French.

    Le grand Satyre & Tygre d’Hircanie,
    Don presenté a ceux de l’Occean,
    Un chef de Classe istra de Carmanie,
    Qui prendra Terre au Thyrren Phocean.

    English.

    The great Satyr and Tyger of Hircania,
    Shall be a gift presented to those of the Ocean,
    An Admiral of a fleet shall come out of Carmania,
    Who shall Land in the Thyrren Phocean.

ANNOT.

By the great Satyr and Tyger of Hircania, is meant, the King of
Persia, who is also King of Hircania, abounding with Tygers.

That King of Persia shall be made a gift to those of the Ocean; that
is, shall be either drowned in it, or do some wonderful things upon it.

Carmania is a Province in Asia, belonging to the Turk.

The Thyrren Phocean is the City of Marseilles in France, so called
by the Author in this Book; because it was a Colony of the Phocenses
in Greece; it is also called Thyrren, because it is seated upon the
Tyrrhenean Sea, as Virgil saith,

    ————Thyrrenum navigat Æquor.


XCI.

    French.

    L’Arbre qu’estoit par long temps mort seiché,
    Dans une nuit viendra a reverdir,
    Son Roy malade, Prince pied attaché,
    Craint d’ennemis fera Voiles bondir.

    English.

    The Tree that had been long dead and withered,
    In one night shall grow green again,
    His King shall be sick, his Prince shall have his foot tied,
    Being feared by his enemies, he shall make his Sails to rebound.

ANNOT.

The two first Verses are Metaphorical, and are to be understood of a
considerable person, who having been for a long time despised and under a
cloud, shall on a sudden rise again and be in repute. The two last Verses
are intelligible enough.


XCII.

    French.

    Le monde proche du dernier periode,
    Saturn encor sera tard de retour,
    Translat Empire devers Nations brode,
    L’œil arraché a Narbon par Autour.

    English.

    The world being near its last period,
    Saturn shall come yet late to his return,
    The Empire shall be translated into brode Nations,
    Narbon shall have her eye pickt out by a Hawk.

ANNOT.

The meaning of the first and second Verses is, that the world shall be at
an end, before Saturn hath performed his whole course, which (if I do
not mistake) is thought by the Astronomers to be of 36000. years.

The third Verse signifieth, that before the end of the world, the Empire
shall be translated or possessed by a black Nation, for brode in old
French signifieth black, whence it cometh that to this day they call a
handsom black woman, une belle Brode, that is a fair black woman.

Narbon is a famous City in Languedoc, and the seat of an Archbishop.


XCIII.

    French.

    Dans Avignon tout le Chef de l’Empire,
    Fera arrest, pour Paris desole,
    Tricast tiendra l’Annibalique ire,
    Lion par change sera mal consolé.

    English.

    In Avignon all the Chief of the Empire,
    Shall stay, by reason of Paris being desolate,
    Tricast shall stop the Annibalik anger,
    Lion by change shall be ill comforted.

ANNOT.

The first and second Verse signifie, that the Pope once more shall keep
his seat in Avignon, which is a Town in France belonging to the
Pope, and where formerly they kept their See, for the space of above an
hundred years. As for the word Tricast, there must be a foul errour
in the impression or else; I must confess I understand it not. By the
Annibilik anger, is meant those of Barbary, where Annibal was born.
Lion is a famous Town in France, where is kept the greatest trading
for Bills of Exchange.


XCIV.

    French.

    De cinq cens ans plus compte l’on tiendra,
    Celuy qu’estoit l’ornement de son temps,
    Puis a un coup grande clarté donra,
    Que pour ce Siecle les rendra tres-contens.

    English.

    For five hundred years no account shall be made,
    Of him who was the ornament of his time:
    Then on a sudden he shall give so great a light,
    That for that age he shall make them to be most contented.

ANNOT.

The words and the sense are plain.


XCV.

    French.

    Lu Loy Morique on verra defaillir,
    Apres un autre beaucoup plus seductive,
    Boristhenes premier viendra faillir,
    Par dons & langue une plus attractive.

    English.

    We shall see the Morish Law to decline,
    After which, another more seducing shall arise,
    Boristhenes shall be the first that shall fall,
    By gifts and tongue that Law shall be most seducing.

ANNOT.

This foretelleth the declining of the Mahometan Religion, after which
another Religion shall be set up worse then the Mahometan. The first
decay of it shall begin in Scythia, a Kingdom belonging to the King of
Persia, through which runneth the River Boristhenes.


XCVI.

    French.

    Chef de Fossan aura gorge coupée,
    Par le Ducteur du Limier & L’curier,
    Le fait patré par ceux du Mont Tarpée,
    Saturne en Leo 13. de February.

    English.

    The Chief of Fossan shall have his throat cut,
    By the Leader of the Hunt and Greyhond,
    The fact committed by those of the Tarpeian Mountain,
    Saturn being in Leo the 13. of February.

ANNOT.

Fossan is a City in Piemont, belonging to the Duke of Savoy, the
Chief man or Governour of which is threatned here to have his throat cut
by some Souldiers, either of Rome, or belonging to Rome, signified
here by the Tarpeian Mountain, upon which the Capitol was built, and
this fact to be committed by one that shall be a famous Huntsman; upon
the 13 of February, Saturn being then in the Sign of Leo.


XCVII.

    French.

    Nouvelle Loy, Terre neuve occuper,
    Vers la Syrie, Judée & Palestine,
    Le grand Empire, Barbare corruer,
    Avant que Phebe son Siecle determine.

    English.

    A new Law shall occupy a new Countrey,
    Towards Syria, Judea and Palestina,
    The great Barbarian Empire shall fall down,
    Before Phœbe maketh an end of her course.

ANNOT.

The words and sense are plain.


XCVIII.

    French.

    Deux Royal Freres si fort guerroieront,
    Qu’entreux sera la guerre si mortelle,
    Qu’un chacun places fortes occuperont,
    De Regne & vie sera leur grand querelle.

    English.

    Two Royal Brothers shall War so much one against the other,
    That the War between them shall be mortal,
    Each of them shall seize upon strong places,
    Their quarrel shall be concerning Kingdom and Life.

ANNOT.

This needeth no interpretation.


XCIX.

    French.

    Aux Champs Herbus d’Alein & du Varneigre,
    Du Mont Lebron proche de la Durance,
    Camps des deux parts conflict sera si aigre,
    Mesopotamie defaillira en France.

    English.

    In the Meadow Fields of Alein and Varneigre,
    Of the Mountain Lebron near the Durance,
    Armies on both sides, the fight shall be so sharp,
    That Mesopotamia shall be wanting in France.

ANNOT.

Alain and Varnaigre are two small Towns in France, seated by the
Mountain Lebron, near the River called Durance, where the Author
saith there shall be such a sharp fight, that Mesopotamia shall be
wanting in France, to understand this you must know, that Mesopotamia
is a Countrey between two Rivers from the Greek words μεσος, which
signifieth middle, and ποταμὸς which signifieth a River, the meaning then
of the Author is, that the Battle so sharp, the ground shall be wanting
to bury the dead.


C.

    French.

    Entre Gaulois le dernier honoré,
    D’homme ennemy sera victorieux,
    Force & terreur en moment exploré,
    D’Un coup de trait quand mourra l’envieux.

    English.

    He that is the least honoured among the French,
    Shall be Conqueror of the man that was his Enemy,
    Strength and terrour shall in a moment be tried,
    When the envious shall be killed with an Arrow.

ANNOT.

This is plain.




THE PROPHECIES OF Michael Nostradamus.

CENTURY IV.


I.

    French.

    Sera du reste de sang non espandu,
    Venice quiert secours estre donné,
    Apres avoir bien lon temps attendu,
    Cité livrée au premier Cor sonné.

    English.

    There shall be a remnant of blood unspilt,
    Venice shall seek for succours,
    After having long waited for it,
    The City shall be surrendred at the first sound of the Trumpet.

ANNOT.

This to my judgement is concerning the Siege of Candia, in which the
Venetians for the space of about twenty years desired and expected
succours from the Christian Princes, which came so slowly, that the City
was fained to surrender upon honorable terms, which is the meaning of the
first Verse, There shall be a remnant of blood unspilt.


II.

    French.

    Par mort la France prendra voiage a faire,
    Classe par Mer, marcher Monts Pyrenées,
    Espagne en trouble marcher gent militaire,
    Des plus grands Dames en France emmenées.

    English.

    By reason of a death, France shall undertake a Journey,
    They shall have a Fleet at Sea, and march towards the Pyrenes,
    Spain shall be in trouble by an Army,
    Some of the greatest Ladies in France carried away

ANNOT.

The whole sense of this is, that by reason of some bodies death, France
shall make war against Spain by Sea and Land, and put Spain in great
trouble.

The fourth Verse saith, that some of the greatest Ladies in France
shall be carried away, but the question is, whether by the Spaniards,
or (which is more probable) by their own Husbands going to war against
Spain.


III.

    French.

    D’Arras & Bourges de Brodes grands enseignes,
    Un plus grand nombre de Gascons battre a pied,
    Ceux long du Rhosne saigneront les Espagnes,
    Proche du Mont ou Sagunte sassied.

    English.

    From Arras and Bourges many colours of black men shall come,
    A greater number of Gascons shall go on foot,
    Those along the Rhosne shall let Spain blood,
    Near the Mountain where Saguntus is seated.

ANNOT.

Arras and Bourges are Cities of France. As for brodes, we have
said before that it signifie brown men, such as are the Gascoins,
inhabiting the Province of Aquitania near Spain.

Saguntus is a City in Spain, that was destroyed by the Romans.


IV.

    French.

    L’Important Prince fasché, plaint & querelle,
    De rapts & pillé par Coqs & par Libiques,
    Grand & par Terre, par Mer infinis Voiles,
    Seule Italie sera chassant Celtiques.

    English.

    The considerable Prince vexed, complaineth and quarelleth,
    Concerning rapes and plunderings done by the Cocks and Libiques
    Great trouble by Land, by Sea infinite Sails,
    Italy alone shall drive away the French.

ANNOT.

This considerable Prince was Philip the II. King of Spain, who was
vexed to see the Cocks, that is the French, and Libiques that is the
Turks joyned together, under Barbarossa to commit so many Rapes and
violences upon his Subjects.


V.

    French.

    Croix Paix, soubs un accomply Divin Verbe,
    L’Espagne & Gaules seront unis ensemble,
    Grand clade proche & combat tresacerbe,
    Cœur si hardy ne sera qui ne tremble.

    English.

    The Cross shall have peace, under an accomplished Divine Word,
    Spain and France shall be united together,
    A great Battle near hand, and a most sharp fight,
    No heart so stout but shall tremble.

ANNOT.

We have said before that by Divine Word, we must not understand the
second person of the Trinity, but a Divine or Theologian, called in Greek
θεόλογος, which also signifieth Divine Word. Therefore the meaning of
the first Verse is, that under the Goverment of some eminent Divine, (be
like a good Pope) the Cross shall have peace, that is, the Christian
Religion shall be in Peace, and persecution shall cease. The last three
Verses are plain.


VI.

    French.

    D’Habits nouveaux apres faite la treuve,
    Malice, trame, & machination,
    Premier mourra qui en fera la preuve,
    Couleur Venise, insidiation.

    English.

    After the new Cloaths shall be found out,
    There shall be malice, plotting and machination,
    He shall die the first that shall make trial of it,
    Under colour of Venice, shall be a conspiracy.

ANNOT.

Everybody may be as wise as I in the interpretation of this.


VII.

    French.

    Le fils mineur du grand & hay Prince,
    De Lepre aura a vingt ans grande tache,
    De dueil mourra triste & mince,
    Et il mourra la ou tombe chair lache.

    English.

    The younger Son of the great and hated Prince,
    Being twenty years, old shall have a great touch of Leprosie,
    His mother shall die for grief, very sad and lean,
    And he shall die of the disease loose flesh.

ANNOT.

This is easie to be understood, if we remember that Charles IX. King
of France, younger son to Henry II. died of a foul disease, and his
Mother Catharine of Medicis died of grief.


VIII.

    French.

    La grand Cité dassaut prompt repentin
    Surpris de nuit, gardes interrompus,
    Les Excubies & veilles Saint Quentin,
    Trucidez gardes, & les Portails rompus.

    English.

    The great City shall be taken by a sudden assault,
    Being surprised by night, the Watch being beaten,
    The Court of Guard and Watch of Saint Quentin
    Shall be killed, and the Gates broken.

ANNOT.

This great City was the City of St. Quentin in Picardy, taken by
assault by Philip the II. Anno 1557.


IX.

    French.

    Le Chef du Camp au milieu de la presse,
    D’un coup de flesche sera blessé aux cuisses,
    Lors que Geneve en larmes & destresse,
    Sera trahie par Lozanne & Souisses.

    English.

    The Chief of the Camp in the middle of the crowd,
    Shall be wounded with an Arrow through both his thighs,
    When Geneva being in tears and distress,
    Shall be betrayed by Lozane and the Switzers.

ANNOT.

The words and sense are plain.


X.

    French.

    Le jeune Prince accusé faucement,
    Mettra le camp en trouble & en querelles,
    Meurtry le chef par le souslevement,
    Sceptre appaiser, puis guerir escroüelles.

    English.

    The young Prince being falsely accused,
    Shall put the Camp in trouble, and in quarrele,
    The chief shall be murdered by the tumult,
    The Scepter shall be appeased, and after cure the Kings-evil.

ANNOT.

This Prophecie must needs be concerning England or France; for there
is but those two Kings that challenge the cure of the Kings-evil.


XI.

    French.

    Celuy quaura couvert de la grand Cappe,
    Sera induit a quelque cas patrer,
    Les douze rouges viendront soüiller la nappe,
    Soubs meurtre, meurtre se viendra perpetrer.

    English.

    He that shall be covered with a great Cloak,
    Shall be induced to commit some great fact,
    The twelve red ones shall Soil the Table-cloth,
    Under murder, murder shall be committed.

ANNOT.

Every one may interpret this as well as I, provided that by the twelve
red ones, he understandeth twelve Cardinals.


XII.

    French.

    Le Camp plus grand de route mis ensuite,
    Gueres plus outre ne sera pourchassé,
    Ost recampé & legion reduite,
    Puis hors, des Gaules du tout sera chassé.

    English.

    The greatest Camp being in disorder, shall be routed,
    And shall be pursued not much after,
    The Army shall incamp again, and the Troops set in order,
    Then afterwards, they shall be wholly driven out of France.

ANNOT.

This Prophecie is concerning an out-landish Army that shall invade
France, and though numerous, yet shall be put to flight, and shall not
be much pursued: therefore it shall incamp again, and collect and gather
again its Troops, and afterwards shall be wholly driven out of France.

I am much mistaken if this Prophecie came not to pass, when the Duke of
Parma at the head of a Spanish numerous Army came into France in
favour of the League; for Henry IV. met him at the siege of Roven,
beat him off, and suffered him to retire quietly, and as the common
saying is, made him a Golden Bridge, to retreat into the Low-Countries
again.


XIII.

    French.

    De plus grand perte nouvelles rapportées,
    Le rapport fait le camp festonnera,
    Bandes unies encontre revoltées,
    Double Phalange, grand abandonnera.

    English.

    News being brought of a great loss,
    The report divulged, the Camp shall be astonished,
    Troops being united and revolted,
    The double Phalange shall forsake the great one.

ANNOT.

This hath a connexion with the precedent; for while the Prince of
Parma was busied in France, news was brought to his Camp, that the
Hollanders had taken Antwerp, which discouraged his whole Host, and
made him retire with all speed.

The Word Phalange signifieth a Battailion or part of an Army, which
being expressed here by the word double Phalange, signifieth, that both
Horse and Foot deserted the Duke of Parma upon the hearing of this news.


XIV.

    French.

    La mort subite du premier personage,
    Aura changé & mis un autre au Regne,
    Tost, tard venu a si haut & basage,
    Que Terre & mer faudra que lon le craigne.

    English.

    The sudden death of the chief man,
    Shall cause a change, and put another in the Raign,
    Soon, late come to so high a degree, in a low age,
    So that by Land and Sea he must be feared.

ANNOT.

The two first Verses are plain.

The two last signifie, that a youth shall come to the Kingdom, soon,
that is, by reason of the sudden death of the chief man, and late;
because being but young, he shall Reign so long, that he shall be famous,
and feared by Sea and Land.


XV.

    French.

    D’ou pensera faire venir famine,
    De la viendra le rassasiement,
    L’œil de la Mer par avare canine,
    Pour de l’un lautre donra Huile, Froment.

    English.

    Whence one thought to make famine to come,
    Thence shall come the fulness,
    The eye of the Sea through a doggish covetousness,
    Shall give to both Oyl and Wheat.

ANNOT.

This Prophecie was fulfilled at the famous Siege of Ostend, which
lasted three years and three Months; for the Hollanders that brought
relief to the Town, did for covetousness sell the ammunition to the
Spaniards that besieged it, for which complaint being made by the
States to the Prince of Orenge, Maurice of Nassaw, as also that they
did the like to Newport, which he had besieged; he replyed smartly, do
you not know that your Countrey men would Sail into Hell, were it not for
fear to have their Sails burnt.


XVI.

    French.

    La Cité franche de liberté fait serue,
    Des profligés & resueurs fait azyle,
    Le Roy changé a eux non si proterue,
    De cent seront devenus plus de Mille.

    English.

    The free City from a free one shall become slave,
    And of the banished and dreamers shall be a retreat,
    The King changed in mind, shall not be so froward to them.
    Of one hundred they shall become more than a thousand.

ANNOT.

Here you must observe that the Author being a Papist, speaketh this
concerning the City of Geneva, which he saith from a free City became a
slave, when it shook off the Duke of Savoy’s domination, and became a
retreat to the Protestants, whom he called the banished and dreamers.

In the third Verse, by the King changed in his mind that shall not be
so froward to them, he meaneth, Henry IV. who having changed the
Protestant Religion, to be a Roman Catholick, did undertake their
protection against the Duke of Savoy their Prince.

Hence followeth the explication of the fourth Verse, when he saith, that
of one hundred they shall become more than a thousand; for in few
years the Protestants became so numerous, that they drove the Roman
Catholicks wholly out of the Town, and so have remained to this day
Masters of it.


XVII.

    French.

    Changer a Beaune, Nuis, Chalons, & Dijon,
    Le Duc voulant amender la barrée,
    Marchant pres Fleuve, Poisson, bec de plongeon,
    Verra la queüe: Porte sera serrée.

    English.

    There shall be a change at Beaune, Nuis, Chalons, Dijon,
    The Duke going about to raise Taxes,
    The Merchant near the River shall see the tail
    Of a Fish, having the Bill of a Cormorant: the door shall be shut.

ANNOT.

Beaune, Chalons, and Dijon, are Cities in France, Nuis is a
Town in Germany near the Rhyne, three or four Leagues below Colen.

For the rest, every one may make his own interpretation, for it is hard
to guess who this Duke should be, or that Fish either, that shall have a
Cormorants Bill after whom the door shall be shut.


XVIII.

    French.

    Les plus Lettrez dessus les faits Cœlestes,
    Seront par Princes ignorans reprouvez,
    Punis d’Edict, chassez comme scelestes,
    Et mis a mort la ou seront trouvez.

    English.

    The most Learned in the Celestial sciences,
    Shall be found fault with, by ignorant Princes.
    Punished by proclamation, chased away as wicked,
    And put to death where they shall be found.

ANNOT.

This is plain, and signifieth no more then a persecution against the
Professors of Heavenly sciences, such as are Astrologers, Astronomers,
&c.


XIX.

    French.

    Devant Rouan d’Insubres mis le Siege,
    Par Terre & Mer enfermez les passages,
    D’Hainaut, de Flandres de Gand & ceux de Liege,
    Par leurs levées raviront les Rivages.

    English.

    Before Rouan a Siege shall be laid by the Insubrians.
    By Sea and Land the passages shall be shut up,
    Those of Hainaut, Flanders, Ghent, and Liege,
    With their Troops shall plunder the Sea-shore.

ANNOT.

This is still concerning the Duke of Parma’s Army, when he came into
France against Henry the IV. in favour of the League, for his Army
wherewith he Besieged Rouen, was compounded of all those Nations; the
greatest part of which were Italians, called here Insubrians, from
the Latin word Insubria, which signifieth the Countreys of Savoy and
Piemont.


XX.

    French.

    Paix uberté long temps on ne loüera,
    Part tout son Regne desert la fleur de Lis,
    Corps mort d’Eau, Terre on apportera,
    Sperants vain heur d’estre la ensevelis.

    English.

    Peace and plenty shall not be long praised,
    All the time of his Reign the Flower de Luce shall be deserted,
    Bodies shall die by water, Earth shall be brought,
    Hoping vainly to be there Buried.

ANNOT.

This only foretelleth a great Famine and Inundation in France,
signified here by the Flower de Luce.


XXI.

    French.

    Le changement sera fort difficile,
    Cité Province au change gain fera,
    Cœur haut, prudent mis, chassé l’Inhabile,
    Mer, Terre, Peuple, son estat changera.

    English.

    The change shall be very hard,
    The City and Countrey shall gain by the change,
    A high prudent heart shall be put in, the unworthy expelled,
    Sea, Land, People shall change its condition.

ANNOT.

This needeth no Interpretation.


XXII.

    French.

    La grand Copie qui sera dechassée,
    Dans un moment fera besoing au Roy,
    La Foy promise de loing sera faucée,
    Nud se verra en piteux defarroy.

    English.

    The great Army that shall be rejected,
    In a moment shall be wanted by the King.
    The faith promised a far off shall be broken,
    So that he shall be left naked in a pitiful case.

ANNOT.

This is plain.


XXIII.

    French.

    La Legion dans la Marine classe,
    Calcine Magnes, Souphre & Poix bruslera,
    Le long repos de l’asseurée place,
    Port Selin chercher, feu les consumera.

    English.

    The Legion in the Maritine Fleet,
    Calcineth Magnes, shall burn Brimstone and Pitch,
    The long rest of the secure place,
    They shall seek Port Selyn, but fire shall consume them.

ANNOT.

Here we must observe four things, the first is, that Calais is called
by the Author, The long rest of the secure place. Because then viz.
in the year 1555. it was yet in the power of the King of England, and
had been quietly before, for the space of 287. years, that is, from the
year 1347. till the year 1555. and was so still, till the year 1557. when
the Duke of Guise took it, whence we gather that it was a secure place
that had enjoyed so long a rest.

The second is, that those of Diepe did watch for the Spaniards, in
the passage between Dover and Calais, therefore the Author saith,
They shall seek Port Selyn, Selyn Port or Harbour is always taken by
the Author for an Harbour in the Ocean.

The third is, that the great fight between the French and the
Spaniards was by fire, so that most part of the Ships on each side were
burnt, and the Spanish and French Souldiers did cast themselves into
the Sea, to save their lives in their enemies Ships, where they were
slain.

The fourth is, that those of Diepe being extraordinary skilful in
Sea-fights had made great quantity of artificial fires, to cast into the
Spanish Ships, but the Ships grapling one with another, they were burnt
on both sides.

Upon those four circumstances the two first Verses say, that the Legion
in the Fleet Calcineth magnes, that is Loadstone burnt, and shall burn
Pitch and Brimstone, to make Artificial fires.

The third and fourth Verse say, that this Sea Legion shall seek an
Harbour in the Ocean, which shall be a secure place, by a long rest,
that is Calais. She will seek that Selyn Harbour to shelter her self,
because Calais did then belong to the English, but by reason of the
narrowness of the Sea, the French watched for the Spaniards there,
and to shew that they sought onely for Calais to meet the Spaniards,
they carried the Spanish Ships which they took into Diepe, and not
into Calais.

The French Impression hath a fault here, putting Port Hercle instead
of Port Selyn, which is a manifest error, for the taking of Port
Hercle by the Florentines the 14. of June 1555. was by a Land Army,
besides, that Port Selyn is always taken by the Author for a Port in
the Ocean.


XXIV.

    French.

    Ouy soubs Terre Sainte Dame voix feinte,
    Humaine flamme pour Divine voir luire,
    Fera des sœurs de leur sang Terre tainte,
    Et les Saints Temples par les impurs destruire.

    English.

    Under ground shall be heard the fained voice of a Holy Dame,
    An humane flame to see a Divine one,
    Shall cause the ground to be died with the sisters blood,
    And the Holy Temples to be destroyed by the wicked.

ANNOT.

Every one may understand this as well as I.


XXV.

    French.

    Corps sublimes sans fin a l’œil visibles,
    Obnubiler viendront par ces raisons,
    Corps, front compris, sens & chef invisibles,
    Diminuant les Sacrées Oraisons.

    English.

    The Celestial bodies that are always visible to the eye,
    Shall be darkened for these reasons,
    The body with the forehead sense and head invincible.
    Diminishing the Sacred Prayers.

ANNOT.

This is of the same nature as the foregoing.


XXVI.

    French.

    Lou grand Cyssame se levera d’abelhos,
    Que non lauran don te siegen venguddos,
    Denuech lenbousq, lun gach dessous las treilhos,
    Ciutad trahido per cinq lengos non nudos.

    English.

    The great swarm of Bees shall rise,
    And it shall not be known whence they come,
    Towards the Ambush so the Jay shall be under a Vine,
    A City shall be betray’d by five tongues not naked.

ANNOT.

The Author having made this Stanza in the Provencal Language, that was
his Mother Tongue, which hath very little relation to the rest of the
French tongue, hath put me to some trouble to understand it; at last
I found the meaning to be this, that when a great swarm of Bees shall
light on some place, and it shall not be known whence they came, then
shall be seen a Jay under a Vine, and a City shall be betrayed by five
several Nations.


XXVII.

    French.

    Salon, Mansol, Tarascon, de Sex, Larc,
    Ou est debout encor la Pyramide,
    Viendront livrer le Prince Denemark,
    Rachat honny au Temple d’Artemide.

    English.

    Salon, Mansol, Tarascon, Desex, the arche,
    Where to this day standeth the Pyramis,
    Shall come to deliver the Prince of Denmark,
    A shameful ransom shall be paid in the Temple of Artemis.

ANNOT.

Salon, Mansol, Tarascon, Desex, are Towns in Provence and
Languedo.

By the Arch, here is meant the Triumphal Arch of Caius Marius, which
he erected after the defeat of the Cimbres and Teutons, and remaineth
to this day in that Province, within two or three Leagues off the Town of
Orenge.

Artemis is an Epethete of Diana, so called ’πο τοῦ ἀερὰ τεμνειν, a
secando aerem.


XXVIII.

    French.

    Lors que Venus du Sol sera couvert,
    Soubs la splendeur sera la forme occulte,
    Mercure au feu les aura descouvert,
    Par bruit Bellique sera mis a l’Insulte.

    English.

    When Venus shall be covered by the Sun,
    Under the splendor of it shall be an occult form,
    Mercury in the fire shall discover them,
    And by a Warlike rumor shall be provoked.

ANNOT.

If this Book cometh ever into the hands of Hermes’s Disciples, I
shall desire they would consider diligently this Stanza, and the three
following; for they are all concerning the Elixir of the Philosophers,
or the making of the Philosophers stone. To begin with this:

When ~Venus~ shall be covered by the Sun.

This is the Astral point, so much sought after by the Philosophers, for
the beginning of their work, without the knowledge of which they cannot
begin their work, or come to any good.

Under the splendor of it shall be an occult form, that is, under that
conjunction lyeth a great mystery.

~Mercury~ in the fire shall discover them, viz. Mercury of the
Philosophers, made by Cœlestial fire.

And by a Warlike rumor shall be provoked; that is, the Planet of
Mercury shall be provoked to mix his variable and changable disposition
with theirs, by his Aspects, Oppositions, Conjunctions, &c. It is not
possible to speak more plainly.


XXIX.

    French.

    Le Sol caché, eclipsé par Mercure,
    Ne sera mis que pour le Ciel second,
    De Vulcan Hermes sera faite Pasture,
    Sol sera veu pur, rutilant & blond.

    English.

    The Sun shall be hid and eclipsed by Mercury,
    And shall not be set but for the second Heaven,
    Hermes shall be made a prey to Vulcan,
    And after that the Sun shall be seen pure, shining and yellow.

ANNOT.

Here I must lead the Reader with Ariadnes Thread, that he may extrecate
himself out of this Labyrinth.

The Sun shall be hid and Eclipsed by ~Mercury~; that is, Gold shall be
Eclipsed and dissolved by the Philosophers Mercury, which is the Key and
foundation of all the work.

And shall not be set but for the second Heaven; that is, shall not be
used till you come to the second part of the work, which is that of the
Furnace.

~Hermes~ shall be made a prey to ~Vulcan~; that is, the matter and
composition of the Elixir, shall be put upon the fire in a Furnace.

And after that the Sun shall be seen pure, shining, yellow; that is,
in conclusion after projection made, thou shalt see pure, shining, and
Yellow Gold.


XXX.

    French.

    Plus d’unze fois Luna Sol ne voudra,
    Tous augmentes & baissez de degre,
    Et si bas mis que peu d’Or on coudra,
    Qu’apres faim, peste, descouvert le secret.

    English.

    The Moon will not have the Sun above eleven times,
    Then both shall be encreased and lessened in degree,
    And put so low, that a little Gold shall be sowed up,
    So that after hunger and plague, the secret shall be discovered.

ANNOT.

The Moon will not have the Sun above eleven times; that is, the Moon of
the Philosophers will not imbibe their Sun above Eleven times.

Then both shall be encreased and lessened in degree; that is, both shall
be encreased in quality, and lessened in quantity.

And put so low that a little Gold shall be sowed up; that is, the
powder of projection, or Philosophers stone shall be so small in Bulk,
that one may sow it about him, and hide it in his Cloths.

After famine and plague the secret shall be discovered; that is,
somebody shall die, with famine or plague, about which the secret shall
be found and discovered.


XXXI.

    French.

    La Lune au plain de nuit sur le haut Mont,
    Le nouveau Sophe d’Un seul cerveau la veu,
    Par ses Disciples estre immortel semond,
    Yeux au Midy, enfin, mains corps au feu.

    English.

    The Moon at full by night upon the high Mount,
    The new Sophe with one onely Brain hath seen it,
    Invited by his Disciples to become immortal,
    His eyes to the South, conclusion, his hands and body to the fire.

ANNOT.

Sophe in Greek signifieth a wise man or Philosopher, who shall find the
Philosophers stone, when the Moon shall come to the full in the night
upon a high Mount. His Disciples shall perswade him to make himself
immortal, they being perswaded that the Elixir cureth all diseases.

The last Verse saith, His eyes to the South, his hands and body to
the fire; that is, this Chymist or Adeptus, shall retire into some
Southern Countrey to work.

I cannot omit here that a conceited Chymist in Paris, whose name was
Haumont, in English, Highmount, could not be disswaded but our
Author spake of him in this Stanza, and that he could not die till he had
got the Philosophers stone, but to other matters.


XXXII.

    French.

    Es lieux & temps chair au poisson donra lieu,
    La loy commune sera faite au contraire,
    Vieux tiendra fort puis osté du milieu,
    Le Panta, Choina, Philon mis fort arriere.

    English.

    In places and times, flesh shall give place to fish,
    The common Law shall be made against it,
    The old man shall stand fast, then being taken away
    The Panta, Choina, Philon, shall be set aside.

ANNOT.

Panta, Choina, Philon, are three Greek words, παντὰ χοινα φιλῶν,
which signifie in Latine, omnia inter amicos communia, and in
English, all things are common among friends. The rest is easie.


XXXIII.

    French.

    Jupiter joint plus Venus qu’a la Lune,
    Apparoissant de plenitude blanche,
    Venus cachée soubs la blancheur Neptune,
    De Mars frappée par la gravée branche.

    English.

    Jupiter being more joyned to Venus then to the Moon,
    Appearing in a full whiteness,
    Venus being hid under the whiteness of Neptune,
    Stricken by Mars through the ingraved branch.

ANNOT.

These terms being Astronomical and Astrological, it is hard to guess
at the Authors mind.


XXXIV.

    French.

    Le grand mené captif d’estrange Terre;
    Dor enchainé au Roy Cheyren offert,
    Qui dans Ausonne, Milan perdra la Guerre,
    Et tout son Ost mis a Feu & a Fer.

    English.

    The great one brought Prisoner from a far Countrey,
    And chained with Gold, shall be presented to the King Chyren,
    Being then at Ausone. Milan shall loose the War.
    And all its Host shall be put to fire and sword.

ANNOT.

The meaning of this is, that when a great one from a far Countrey, shall
be brought Prisoner chained with gold, and presented to a King called
Henry (for Cheyren by transposition of letters is Henry) who then
shall beat Bordeaux; Milan shall loose a great Army.


XXXV.

    French.

    Le feu esteint, les vierges trahiront,
    La plus grand part de la bande nouvelle,
    Pouldre a feu les seuls Rois garderont,
    Hetrusque & Corse, de nuit, gorge alumelle.

    English.

    The fire being put out, the Virgins shall betray,
    The greatest part of the new troup,
    Gunpowder, Lance, shall keep only the Kings,
    In Hetruria and Corsica by night throats shall be cut.

ANNOT.

Hetruria is the Country Tuscany now under the Duke of Florence,
and Corsica is an Island in the Mediterranean Sea belonging to the
Genoese. The rest is plain.


XXXVI.

    French.

    Les jeux nouveaux en Gaule redressez,
    Apres Victoire de l’Insubre Campagne,
    Monts d’Hesperie, les grands liez troussez,
    De peur trembler la Romagne & l’Espagne.

    English.

    The new plays shall be set up again in France,
    After the Victory obtained in Piemont,
    Mountains of Spain, the great ones tied, carried away,
    Romania and Spain shall quake for fear.

ANNOT.

This is a Prognostication of the rejoycing that should be in France,
after the winning of that famous battle Serizoles in Piemont, against
the Armies of the Emperour and the King of Spain.


XXXVII.

    French.

    Gaulois par saults Monts viendra penetrer,
    Occupera le grand Mont de l’Insubre,
    Au plus profond son Ost sera entrer,
    Genes, Monech pousseront classe rubre.

    English.

    The French by leaping shall go over the Mountains,
    And shall seize upon the great Mount of the Savoyard,
    He shall cause his Army to go to the furthermost,
    Genoa, and Monaco shall set out their red Fleet.

ANNOT.

This Prophecy is concerning Henry the IV. King of France, who went
over the Alpes and conquered the Duke of Savoy’s Countrey, because
he would not restore the Markdom of Salvees. Genoa and Monaco are
Cities near Savoy.


XXXVIII.

    French.

    Pendant que Duc, Roy, Roine occupera,
    Chef Bizantin captif en Samothrace,
    Avant lassault l’un l’autre mangera,
    Rebours ferré suivra du sang la trace.

    English.

    While the Duke shall busie the King and the Queen,
    A great man of Constantinople shall be prisoner in Samothracia,
    Before the assault one shall eat up the other,
    Rebours shod shall trace one by the blood.

ANNOT.

The three first Verses are plain, as for the fourth, either it is falsly
Printed, or I must confess I understand it not.


XXXIX.

    French.

    Les Rhodiens demanderont secours,
    Par le neglect de ses hoirs delaissée,
    L’Empire Arabe ravalera son cours,
    Par Hesperie la cause redressée.

    English.

    The Rhodiens shall ask for succours,
    Being forsaken by the neglect of her Heirs,
    The Arrabian Empire shall slack his course,
    By the means of Spain the case shall be mended.

ANNOT.

By the Rhodians are understood the Knights of Maltha, because they
dwelt first at Rhodes.

By the second Verse it is said, it was the neglect of her Heirs, that
is of the Heirs of Rhodes the Knights of Maltha, who being careless
of themselves, were besieged by Solyman, which constrained them to ask
succours of all the Christian Princes, which came very slowly, at last
Dom Garcia Viceroy of Sicily relieved them, and drove away the Turks
that had suffered great loss, therefore the Author saith in the third
Verse, The ~Arabian~ Empire shall slack his course.


XL.

    French.

    Les Forteresses des Assiegez serrez,
    Par poudre a feu profondez en abysme,
    Les proditeurs seront tous vifs serrez,
    Onc aux Sacristes navint si piteux schisme.

    English.

    The strong places of the Besieged shall be straightned,
    By Gunpowder they shall be plonged into a pit,
    The Traytors shall be shut up alive,
    Never did happen so pitiful schisme to the Sacristes.

ANNOT.

By the Sacristes, he understandeth the Clergy of the Roman Religion.


XLI.

    French.

    Gynique Sexe captive par Hostage,
    Viendra de nuit custodes decevoir,
    Le Chef du Camp deceu par son language,
    Lairra la gente, sera piteux a voir.

    English.

    Gynical sexe being captive by Hostage,
    Shall come by night to deceive her keepers,
    The Chief of the Camp being deceived by her Language,
    Shall leave her folks, a thing pitiful to behold.

ANNOT.

Gynical Sex is a woman from the Greek word γυνὴ, which signifieth a
woman.

The meaning then of this Stanza is, that a woman being given in Hostage,
and made prisoner, shall deceive her keepers, and among the rest, the
chief Captain who shall forsake his Troops and run away with her.


XLII.

    French.

    Geneve & Langres par ceux de Chartre & Dole,
    Et par Grenoble captif au Montlimar,
    Seysset, Lausane, par fraudulente dole,
    Les trahiront pour Or soixante mark.

    English.

    Geneve and Langres by those of Chartres and Dole,
    And by one of Grenoble captive at Montlimar,
    Seisset, Lozanne by a fraudulent deceit,
    Shall betray them for thirty pounds weight of Gold.

ANNOT.

All those Towns are in France, the sense is plain.


XLIII.

    French.

    Seont ouis au Ciel les Armes battre,
    Celuy an mesme les Divins ennemis,
    Voudront Loix Saintes injustement debatre,
    Par Foudre & guerre bien croians a mort mis.

    English.

    There shall be heard in the Air noise of Weapons,
    And in that same year the Divines shall be enemies,
    They shall unjustly put down the Holy Laws,
    And by the Thunder and the War true believers shall die.

ANNOT.

There is no obscurity in this.


XLIV.

    French.

    Deux gros de Mende, de Rhodez, & Millaud,
    Cahors, Limoges, Castre, malo sepmano,
    De nuech l’intrado, de Bourdeaux an cailhau,
    Par Perigort au toc de la Campano.

    English.

    Two great ones of Mende, of Rhodez and Milliaud,
    Cahors, Limoges, Castres an evil week,
    By night the entry shall be from Bourdeaux one cailhau,
    Through Perigort at the ringing of the Bell.

ANNOT.

This Stanza is half French and half Provencal language.

All the Cities named here, Mende, Rhodez, Milliaud, Cahors,
Limoges, Castres, Bourdeaux, Perigort, are Cities of France,
bordering upon Provence, which is the Countrey wherein our Author was
born.

The meaning of it is, that all those Cities shall rise against the
Collectors of the Kings Taxes, and shall set upon them by the sound of
the Bell, which is already come to pass, and may come to pass yet.


XLV.

    French.

    Par conflict, Roy Regne abandonera,
    Le plus grand Chef faillira au besoing,
    Morts, profligez peu en rechapera,
    Tous destrenchez un en sera tesmoin.

    English.

    By a Battle the King shall forsake his Kingdom,
    The greatest Commander, shall fail in time of need,
    They shall be killed and routed, few shall escape,
    They shall be cut off, one only shall be left for a witness.

ANNOT.

This is a Prognostication of a great Battle, by the loss of which a King
shall forsake his Kingdom, his chief Commander having deserted him in
time of need. The slaughter shall be so great, that none shall be left
but one for a witness.


XLVI.

    French.

    Bien defendu le fait par excellence,
    Garde toy Tours de ta proche ruine,
    Londres & Nantes par Rheims fera defence,
    Ne passes outre au temps de la bruine.

    English.

    The fact shall be defended excellently well
    Tours beware of thy approaching ruine,
    London and Nantes by Rhemes shall stand upon their defence,
    Do not go further in foggy weather.

ANNOT.

Tours is the chief City of a Province in France, called Touraine,
which is commended here for having resisted excellently well; but
is forewarned to look to her self after that, and to beware of her
approaching ruine.


XLVII.

    French.

    Le noir farouche quand aura essayé,
    Sa main sanguine par feu, fer, arcs tendus,
    Trestout le peuple sera tant effrayé,
    Voir les plus grands par col & pieds pendus.

    English.

    The wild black one, after he shall have tryed,
    His bloody hand by fire, Sword, bended Bows,
    All the people shall be so frighted,
    To see the greatest hanged by the neck and feet.

ANNOT.

It is a description of a Tyrant, who after he shall have tryed his
bloody hand by Fire, Sword, and bent Bows, shall cause his chief men to
be hanged by the neck and feet. Since the Author did write there had
been such a Tyrant in the world, namely, John Basilides, great Duke of
Russia, in the year 1572. Read Paul Osburne in his Life.


XLVIII.

    French.

    Planure Ausone fertile spacieuse,
    Produira taons, & tant de sauterelles,
    Clarte solairé deviendra nubilense,
    Ronger le rout, grand peste venir delles.

    English.

    The Plain about Bourdeaux fruitful and spacious,
    Shall produce so many Hornets and so many Grashopers,
    That the light of the Sun shall be darkened,
    They shall crap all, a great plague shall come from them.

ANNOT.

I cannot find in History that this hath yet happened, since the writing
of these Prophecies, therefore I reckon it de futuro.


XLIX.

    French.

    Devant le peuple sang sera respandu,
    Qui du haut Ciel ne viendra esloigner,
    Mais d’un long temps ne sera entendu,
    L’Esprit d’un seul le viendra tesmoigner.

    English.

    Before the people blood shall be spilt,
    Who Shall not come far from the high Heaven,
    But it shall not be heard of for a great while,
    The Spirit of one shall come to witness it.

ANNOT.

This Prophecie is concerning some just person, that shall be murdered
openly: His blood shall cry to Heaven, but shall not be heard for a good
while, till at last it shall be discovered by some body.


L.

    French.

    Libra verra regner les Hesperies,
    De Ciel & Terre tenir la Monarchie,
    D’Asie forces nul ne verra peries,
    Que sept ne tiennent par rang la Hierarchie.

    English.

    Libra shall see Spain to Reign,
    And have the Monarchy of Heaven and Earth,
    No body shall see the forces of Asia to perish,
    Till seven have kept the Hierarchy successively.

ANNOT.

Libra is one of the twelve signs of the Zodiack, which is favourable
to Spain, so that the meaning of this is, that Libra shall see ~Spain~
to Reign.

And besides that, to have the Monarchy of Heaven and Earth; that is, to
have the command of the Pope, and of the best part of Europe. So that
no Asian or Turkish forces shall receive damage by the Christians,
till seven Popes of the Spanish faction have Reigned successively, and
one after another.


LI.

    French.

    Un Duc cupide son ennemy poursuivre,
    Dans entrera empeschant la Phalange,
    Hastez a pied si pres viendront poursuivre,
    Que la journée conflite aupres du Gange.

    English.

    A Duke being earnest in the pursute of his enemy
    Shall come in, hindering the Phalange,
    Hastened on foot shall follow them so close,
    That the day of the Battle shall be near Ganges.

ANNOT.

A Phalange, in Latine Phalanx, is a Squadron of Souldiers, which word
was anciently proper only to the Macedonians. Ganges is a River in
India.


LII.

    French.

    En Cité obsesse aux murs hommes & femmes,
    Ennemis hors, le chef prest a soy rendre,
    Vent sera fort encontre les gens darmes,
    Chassez seront par chaux, poussiere & cendre.

    English.

    In a besieged City, men and women being upon the walls,
    The enemies without, the Governour ready to surrender,
    The Wind shall be strong against the Souldiers,
    They shall be driven away by lime, dust, and ashes.

ANNOT.

This is a peculiar and remarkable accident, wherein the besiegers of
a City shall be driven away from their enterprise, by Lime, Dust, and
Ashes, scattered and dispersed against them by a mighty wind.


LIII.

    French.

    Les fugitifs & bannis revoqués,
    Peres & Fils garnissant les hauts puits,
    Le cruel pere & les tiens suffoquez,
    Son Fils plus pire submergé dans le puits.

    English.

    The runnaways and banished men being recalled,
    Fathers and Sons garnishing the high wells,
    The cruel father and his retinue shall be suffocated,
    His Son being worse, shall be drowned in the Well.

ANNOT.

The words are plain, out of which every one may make his own sense.


LIV.

    French.

    Du nom qui on ne fut au Roy Gaulois,
    Jamais ne fut un Foudre si craintif,
    Tremblant l’Italie, l’Espagne, & les Anglois,
    De femmes estrangeres grandement attentif.

    English.

    Of the name that a French King never was,
    There was never a Lightning so much feared,
    Italy shall tremble, Spain and the English,
    He shall be much taken with women strangers.

ANNOT.

This foretelleth that when a French King shall have a name that never
any of his Predecessors had, he shall be so much feared as that Italy,
Spain, and England shall tremble, and that besides he shall be much
given to women.


LV.

    French.

    Quand la Corneille sur Tour de Brique jointe,
    Durant sept heures ne fera que crier,
    Mort presagée, de sang Statue teinte,
    Tyran meurdry, aux Dieux peuple prier.

    English.

    When the Crow upon a Tower made of Brick,
    For seven hours shall do nothing but cry,
    Death shall be foretold, and the Statue died with blood,
    Tyrant shall be murdered, and the people pray to the Gods.

ANNOT.

This extraordinary Prodigy of a Crow crying for seven hours together upon
a Brick Tower, foretelleth that some notorious Tyrant shall be put to
death, and his statue sprinkled with blood, and withall, that the people
either for joy or fear shall be much given to prayer.


LVI.

    French.

    Apres Victoire de rabieuse Langue,
    L’Esprit tempté, en tranquil & repos,
    Victeur sauguin par conflict, fait Harangue,
    Roustir la Langue, & la Chair & les Os.

    English.

    After the Victory got over a raging tongue,
    The mind that was tempted, shall be in tranquility and rest,
    The bloody Conqueror by Battle shall make a Speech,
    And roast the tongue, the flesh, and the bones.

ANNOT.

It is a Conquerour who having been much railed at by his enemies, shall
in conclusion after he hath overcome them, take a severe vengeance of
them.


LVII.

    French.

    Ignare envie au grand Roy supportée,
    Tiendra propos deffendre les escrits,
    Sa femme non femme par un autre tentée,
    Plus double deux ira au fort de cris.

    English.

    Ignorant envy being supported by the great King,
    Shall talk of prohibiting the writtings,
    His wife no wife, being tempted by another,
    Shall more then they two prevail by crying.

ANNOT.

Some ignorant envious person being in favour with the King, shall go
about to suppress learning, but the Kings wife no wife, that is his
Concubine, shall persuade him to the contrary, and shall prevail.


LVIII.

    French.

    Soleil ardent dans la gosier couler,
    De sang humain arrouser Terre Etrusque,
    Chef seille d’eau, mener son fils filer,
    Captive Dame conduite Terre Turque.

    English.

    Burning Sun shall be poured into the throat,
    This human blood shall wet the Hetrurian ground,
    The chief pale of water, shall lead his son to Spin,
    A captive Lady shall be carried into the Turkish Countrey.

ANNOT.

By burning Sun must be understood melted gold, which shall be poured into
ones throat, in the Hetrurian ground, that is in Tuscany.

By the chief Pale of water is to be understood, some Water-bearer, who
shall make his son an Eunuch to make benefit on’t. The fourth Verse is
plain.


LIX.

    French.

    Deux assiegez en ardante ferveur,
    De soif estaints pour deux plaines Tasses;
    Le fort limé & un vieillard resueur,
    Au Genois, de Nizza monstrera trace.

    English.

    Two besieged, being in a burning heat,
    Shall die for thirst, want of two Bowls full,
    The Fort being filed, an old doting man,
    Shall show to the Genoese the way to Nizza.

ANNOT.

The two first Verses are plain. The two last Verses signifie that an old
doting man shall shew to the Genoeses the way how to take Nizza, a
Town hard by them, by filing some Iron Grates, by which they shall get
into the Town.


LX.

    French.

    Les sept enfans en Hostage laissez,
    Le tiers viendra son enfant trucider,
    Deux par son fils seront d’estoc percez,
    Genes, Florence les viendra seconder.

    English.

    The seven Children being left in Hostage,
    The third shall come to kill his child,
    Two by their sons shall be run through,
    Genoa and Florence shall second them.

ANNOT.

The words being so plain, every body may give as good an interpretation
as I.


LXI.

    French.

    Le vieux mocqué & privé de sa place,
    Par l’Estranger qui le subornera,
    Mais de son filz mangé devant sa face,
    Le Frere a Chartres. Orl. Rouen trahira.

    English.

    The old man shall be baffled and deprived of his place,
    By the stranger that shall suborn him,
    But of his son shall be eaten before his face,
    The Brother at Chartres. Orl. shall betray Rouen.

ANNOT.

This Stanza is divided into two parts. The first part runneth from the
first Verse to the middle of the fourth. The meaning is, that an old
man shall be baffled and deprived of his place by a stranger that shall
suborn him, but that strangers sons brother shall be eaten up before his
face in the Town of Chartres; what he meaneth by eaten up, is hard to
guess, whether it be by poverty, sutes at Law, Envy, Lice, &c.

The Hemisthikion of the last Verse, ~Orl.~ shall betray ~Rouen~,
signifieth, that Orleans shall betray Rouen.


LXII.

    French.

    Un Coronel machine ambition,
    Se saisira de la plus grande Armée,
    Contre son Prince feinte invention,
    Et descouvert sera soubs sa ramée.

    English.

    A Colonel deviseth a plot by his ambition,
    He shall seize upon the best part of the Army,
    Against his Prince he shall have a fained invention,
    And shall be discovered under the Harbour of the Vine.

ANNOT.

I never saw the last Tyrant Cromwel better painted to the life, then in
the three first Verses.

As for the fourth, it is certain that his intention among his
Camerades was first discovered by him unto them at the Star Tavern in
Coleman-street, which is the place that the Author calleth the Harbour
of the Vine.


LXIII.

    French.

    L’Armée Celtique contre les Montagnars,
    Qui seront sus & pris a la pipée,
    Paisants irez pulseront tost faugnars,
    Precipitez tous au fil de l’Espée.

    English.

    The Celtique Army shall go against the Highlanders,
    Who shall stand upon their guard, and be taken with Bird-lime twigs,
    The Peasant being angry, shall roll down the stones,
    They shall be all put to the edge of the sword.

ANNOT.

This is a description of the attempt made by the French upon Savoy,
which Countrey lieth in the Mountains of the Alpes, therefore called
here Highlanders; where the Peasants being incensed for the loss of
their goods and the ruine of their Countrey, rolled stones from the top
of the Mountains against the French Army, which could not hinder them
from being destroyed; this came to pass under Henry the IV. King of
France, in the year 1662.


LXIV.

    French.

    Le defaillant en habit de Bourgeois,
    Viendra le Roy tenter de son offence,
    Quinze Soldats la pluspart Villageois,
    Vie derniere & chef de sa chevance.

    English.

    The guilty, in a Citizens habit,
    Shall come to tempt the King concerning his offence,
    Fifteen Soldiers the most part Countrey men,
    The last shall be his life, and the best part of his Estate.

ANNOT.

This signifieth that a great man having committed an offence against the
King, shall come to him in a mean habit, to sue for his Pardon, and shall
be carried away by fifteen Souldiers, the most part Countrey fellows;
and in conclusion he shall have his life saved, and the best part of his
Estate.


LXV.

    French.

    Au deserteur de la grand Forteresse,
    Apres qu’aura son lieu abandonné,
    Son adversaire fera si grand provesse,
    L’Empereur tost mort sera condamné.

    English.

    After that the desertor of the great Fort,
    Shall have forsaken his place,
    His adversary shall do so great feats,
    That the Emperor, shall soon be condemned to death.

ANNOT.

This is plain.


LXVI.

    French.

    Soubs couleur feinte de sept testes rasées,
    Seront formez divers explorateurs,
    Puits & Fontains de poison arrousées,
    Au Fort de Genes humains devorateurs.

    English.

    Under the fained colour of seven shaven heads,
    Shall divers spies be framed,
    Wells and Fountains shall be sprinkled with poison,
    In the Fort of Genoa shall be humane devourers.

ANNOT.

The three first Verses belong to the same sense; viz. that seven men
shall be spies, under pretence to be Priests or Monks, (which is the
meaning of the shaven heads) and shall poison the Wells and Springs.

The last Verse signifieth that in the Fort of Genoa, their shall be
devourers of men, that is, Usurers and Extortioners, which is no new
thing in that Nation.


LXVII.

    French.

    L’An que Saturne & Mars esgaux combust,
    L’Air fort seiché, longue trajection,
    Par feux secrets d’ardeur grands lieux adust,
    Peu pluye, Vent chauds, Guerres, Incursions.

    English.

    In the year that Saturn and Mars shall be fiery,
    The Air shall be very dry, in many Countreys,
    By secret fires, many places shall be burnt with heat,
    There shall be scarcity of Rain, hot Winds, Wars, in-roads.

ANNOT.

This is the Prognostication of a mighty dry season, and other accidents
that shall happen when Saturn and Mars shall be in a fiery
disposition, which whether it be by Opposition, Conjunction, Aspect, &c.
Let the Astrologers judge.


LXVIII.

    French.

    En l’an bien proche non esloigné de Venus,
    Les deux plus grands de l’Asie & d’Affrique,
    Du Rhine & Ister qu’on dira sont venus,
    Cris, pleurs a Malthe, & coste Ligustique.

    English.

    In a year that is to come shortly, and not far from Venus,
    The two greatest ones of Asia and Affrica,
    Shall be said to come from the Rhine and Ister,
    Crying, and tears shall be at Maltha and in the Ligurian shore.

ANNOT.

The Rhine is a River in Germany, Ister is another in the Countrey
of Istria, belonging to the Venetians.

By the first Verse, I conclude that this Prophecy came to pass a little
while after the Author wrote this Book, when the grand Segnor Solyman
besieged Maltha, and put in fear all the Ligurian Coast, which is
that of Genoa.


LXIX.

    French.

    La Cité grande les exilez tiendront,
    Les Citadins morts, meurtris & chassez,
    Ceux d’Aquilee a Parme promettront,
    Monstrer l’entrée par les lieux non tracez.

    English.

    The banished shall keep the great City,
    The Citizens being dead, murdered and expelled,
    Those of Aquileia shall promise to Parma,
    To shew the entrance by unknown paths.

ANNOT.

Aquileia and Parma are two Cities in Italy. The rest is easie.


LXX.

    French.

    Bien contigu des grands Monts Pyrenées,
    Un contre l’Aigle grand copie, adresser,
    Ouvertes veines, forces exterminées,
    Que jusqu’au Pau le chief viendra chasser.

    English.

    Near the great Pyrenean Mountains,
    One shall raise a great Army against the Eagle,
    Veins shall be opened, forces driven out,
    So that the chief shall be driven as far as the Pau.

ANNOT.

By the Eagle here is understood the Empire; because his Ensign is an
Eagle.


LXXI.

    French.

    En lieu d’Espouse les Filles trucidées,
    Meurtre a grand faute, ne sera superstite,
    Dedans le puis vestues inondées,
    L’Espouse esteinte par haut d’Aconite.

    English.

    Instead of the Bride, the Maid shall be killed,
    The murder shall be a great fault, none shall be surviving,
    In the Well they shall be drowned with their Cloaths,
    The Bride shall be extinguished by an high Aconite.

ANNOT.

This is a Prophecie of a Tragical Nuptial, where all the Maids shall be
drowned with their Cloaths in a Well, insomuch that none shall survive,
and the Bride shall be poisoned, and die by Aconite, which is one of
the most poisonous herbs that is, witness Juvinal: Lurida terribiles
miscent asonita novercæ.


LXXII.

    French.

    Les Artomiques par Agen & Lectoure,
    A saint Felix feront leur Parliament,
    Ceux de Bazas viendront a la malhoure,
    Saisir Condon & Marsan promptement.

    English.

    The Artomiques through Agen and Lectoure,
    Shall keep their Parliament at Saint Fœlix,
    These of Bazas shall come in an unhappy hour,
    To seize upon Condon and Marsan speedily.

ANNOT.

By the Artomiques he meaneth the Protestants; because they take the
Communion with leavened Bread, which in Greek is called Artos.

Agen, Lectoure, saint Fœlix, Bazas, Condon and Marzan, are
Cities of Gascony. The rest is plain.


LXXIII.

    French.

    Le neveu grand par force prouvera,
    Le peche fait de Cœur pusillanime,
    Ferrare & Ast le Duc esprouvera,
    Par lors qu’au soir sera le Pantomime.

    English.

    The great nephew by force shall provoke,
    The sin committed by the pusillanimous heart,
    Ferrara and Ast shall make tryal of the Duke,
    When the Pantomime shall be in the evening.

ANNOT.

To understand the whole sense of this, we must first know what is meant
by the particular terms.

The great Nephew is the Brother or Sisters son of some great person,
who by force shall discover the Treason or Cowardise, committed by some
pusillanimous or fearful man.

Ferrara and Ast are two towns in Italy, shall make tryal of a Duke,
by being either taken or assaulted.

When the Pantomime shall be in the evening; that is, when the Comedy
shall be acted; for Pantomime in Greek signifieth a Comedian.


LXXIV.

    French.

    Du lac Leman & ceux des Brannonices,
    Tous assemblez contre ceux d’Aquitaine,
    Germans beaucoup encores plus Sovisses,
    Seronts des faits avec ceux du Maine.

    English.

    From lake Leman, and from the Brannonues,
    They shall be gathered against those of Aquitania,
    Great many Germans, and many more Switzers,
    Shall be routed together with those of Maine.

ANNOT.

Lake Leman, is the Lake of Geneva. The Brannonices are those of
Sens, so called; because they took Rome under the Conduct of their
Captain Brennus, and afterwards built Brenona, a Town belonging since
to the Venetians, who calls it Verona.

Aquitania is that Province of France, called now Gascony. Maine
is a Province in France. The rest needeth no explication.


LXXV.

    French.

    Prest a combattre fera defection,
    Chef adversaire obtiendra la victoire,
    Larriere garde fera defension,
    Les defaillans morts au blanc terretoire.

    English.

    One being ready to fight, shall faint,
    The chief of the adverse party shall obtain the victory,
    The rearegard, shall withstand it out,
    Those that fall away shall die in the white Terretory.

ANNOT.

There is nothing difficult here, but what he meaneth by the white
Terretory, whether it be positive, or Allegorical, I leave the judgement
of it to the Reader.


LXXVI.

    French.

    Les Nictobriges par ceux de Perigort,
    Seront vexez tenants jusques au Rhosne,
    L’Associé de Gascons & Bigorre,
    Trahir le Temple le prestre estant au Prosne.

    English.

    The Nictobriges by those of Perigort,
    Shall be vexed as far as the Rhosne,
    The associate of the Gascons and Bigorre,
    Shall betray the Church while the Priest is in his Pulpit.

ANNOT.

Nictobriges in Greek signifieth a people living in a dark and moist
Countrey. Perigort and Bigorre are two Towns in France. The rest is
plain.


LXXVII.

    French.

    Selyn Monarque, l’Italie pacifique,
    Regnes unis, Roy Chrestien du monde,
    Mourant voudra coucher en Terre Blesique,
    Apres Pyrates avoir chassé de L’onde.

    English.

    Selyn being Monarch, Italy shall be in peace,
    Kingdoms shall be united, a Christian King of the world,
    Dying, shall desire to be buried in the Countrey of Blois,
    After he shall have driven the Pyrates from the Sea.

ANNOT.

Selyn is the name of a Turkish Emperour, the meaning therefore of
this, is, that under the Reign of one Selyn a Turkish Emperour,
Italy shall be in peace, and all the Christian Princes united.


LXXVIII.

    French.

    La grand Armée de la pugne civile,
    Pour de nuit Parme a l’Estranger trouvée,
    Septante neuf meurtris dedans la Ville,
    Les estrangers passez tous a l’Espée.

    English.

    The great Army belonging to the Civil War,
    Having found by night Parma possessed by Strangers,
    Shall kill seventy nine in the Town,
    And put all the Strangers to the Sword.

ANNOT.

Parma is a City in Italy. The rest is plain.


LXXIX.

    French.

    Sang Royal fuis, Monheurt, Mars. Aiguillon,
    Remplis seront de Bourdelois les Landes.
    Navarre, Bigorre, pointes & Aiguillons,
    Profonds de faim, vorer de Liege, Glandes.

    English.

    Royal blood run away from Monheurt, Marsan, Aiguillon,
    The Landes shall be full of Bourdeloir,
    Navarre, Bigorre, shall have points and Pricks.
    Being deep in hunger, they shall devour the Cork and Akorns.

ANNOT.

Monheurt, Marsan, Aiguillon, are Towns in Gascony.

Landes is a desert Countrey, wherein nothing groweth but Pine-trees,
Bourdelois are those of Bourdeaux.

Navarre is a Kingdom, and Begorre a Province joyning to those
Landes, or Pine-trees Countrey.


LXXX.

    French.

    Pres du grand Fleuve, grand fosse, terre egeste,
    En quinze parts l’eau sera divisée,
    La Cité prinse, feu, sang, cris, conflict mettre,
    Et la plus part concerne au collisée.

    English.

    Near the great River, a great pit, Earth digged out,
    In fifteen parts the Water shall be divided,
    The City taken, fire, blood, cries, fighting,
    And the greatest part concerneth the Collisés.

ANNOT.

This Prophecy was fulfilled, when Rome was taken and sacked by
Charles Duke of Bourbon, and Philibert of Chalon Prince of
Orenge, Generals of the Emperour Charles the V. with such cruelties,
as never was committed by the bloody Goths and Vandales, and to shew
that the Author intended Rome, is apparant by two instances. The first
is by the great River, which is the Tyber, which though not very
great in its Channel and depth, yet is very great, yea, the greatest in
Europe by its fame. The other is the word Colisée, which is that
famous Arch of Traian in Rome, remaining yet to this day.


LXXXI.

    French.

    Pont on fera promptement de nacelles,
    Passer l’Armée du grand Prince Belgique,
    Dans profondres, & non loing de Bruxelles,
    Outrepassez detrenchez sept a picque.

    English.

    A Bridge of Boats shall suddenly be made,
    To pass over the Army of the great Belgick Prince,
    In deep places, and not far from Bruxelles,
    Being gone over, there shall be seven cut with a Pike.

ANNOT.

This is concerning the Siege of Antwerp by the Prince of Parma,
Governour of the Low-Countreys for the King of Spain, who having
besieged, caused a Bridge of Boats to be made upon the River Scheld,
to hinder the succours of the Hollanders, who by that means were
constrained to surrender it.


LXXXII.

    French.

    Amas sapproche venant d’Esclavonie,
    L’Olestant vieux Cité ruinera,
    Fort desolée verra sa Romanie,
    Puis la grand flamme estaindre ne scaura.

    English.

    A great troop gathered, shall come from Sclavonia,
    The old Olestant shall ruine a City,
    He shall see his Romania very desolate,
    And after that, shall not be able to quench that great flame.

ANNOT.

That great troop from Sclavonia shall be the Venetians, because
they possess most part of that Countrey. The old Olestant is their
Duke, because he is not chosen unless he be very old, by Romania is
understood what the Venetians possess in that Countrey.


LXXXIII.

    French.

    Combat nocturne le vaillant Capitaine,
    Vaincu fuira, peu de gens profligé,
    Son peuple esmeu, sedition non vain,
    Son propre fils le tiendra assiegé.

    English.

    In a fight by night, the valliant Captain,
    Being vanquished shall run away, overcome by few,
    His people being moved, shall make no small mutiny,
    His own son shall besiege him.

ANNOT.

This needeth no interpretation.


LXXXIV.

    French.

    Un grand d’Auxerre mourra bien miserable,
    Chassé de ceux qui soubs luy ont esté.
    Serré de chaines, apres d’un rude cable,
    En l’an que Mars, Venus & Sol mis en Esté.

    English.

    A great man of Auxerre shall die very miserably,
    Being expelled by those that have been under him,
    Bound with Chains, and after that with a strong Cable,
    In the year that Mars, Venus, and Sol shall be in a conjunction
      in the Summer.

ANNOT.

Auxerre is a City of France, distant from Paris 40. leagues to the
Southward.


LXXXV.

    French.

    Le Charbon blanc du noir sera chassé,
    Prisonier fait, mené au Tombereau,
    More Chameau sus pieds entrelassez,
    Lors le puisné fillera l’Aubereau.

    English.

    The white Coal shall be expelled by the black one,
    He shall be made Prisoner, carried in a Dung-cart,
    His feet twisted upon a black Camel,
    Then the youngest, shall suffer the Hobby to have more thread.

ANNOT.

The first Verse is altogether Allegorical and Metaphorical, therefore
I leave it to the judgement of every Reader. I shall only deliver my
opinion upon the whole: I take it to be some white Prince, that shall
be overcome by a black one, put in a Dungcart, after that, tied upon a
black Camel, and then the younger son of that black Prince shall give the
prisonner a little more liberty.


LXXXVI.

    French.

    L’An que Saturne en eau sera conjoint,
    Avecques Sol le Roy fort & puissant,
    A Rheims & Aix sera receu & oingt,
    Apres Conquestes meurtrira innocens.

    English.

    In the year that Saturn in Aquarius shall be in conjunction
    With Sol, the King being strong and powerful,
    Shall be received and Anointed at Rheines and Aix,
    After Conquest he shall murder innocent persons.

ANNOT.

This Prophecy is remarkable for the things that it foretelleth, viz.
that in the year that Saturn shall be in conjunction with Sol in
the Sign of Aquarius, a King of France shall be annointed both at
Rhemes and Aix, for Rhemes is a City in France, where the Kings
use to be Annointed and Crowned, and Aix is another in Germany, where
the Emperours use to be so. But the last Verse is ominous, where he
saith, that after his Conquests he shall murder innocent persons.


LXXXVII.

    French.

    Un fils de Roy tant de Langues apprins,
    A son Aisné au Regne different,
    Son Pere beau au plus grand fils comprins,
    Fera perir principal adherent.

    English.

    A son of a King having learned divers Languages,
    Shall fall out with his elder Brother for the Kingdom,
    His father in Law being more concerned with his elder son,
    Shall cause the principal adherent to perish.

ANNOT.

One King shall have two Sons, the eldest shall succeed him in the
Kingdom, the youngest having been well brought up and educated, shall
raise troubles, against the King his Brother; but he shall be destroyed
by the means of his own Father in Law.


LXXXVIII.

    French.

    La grand Antoine du nom de fait sordide,
    De Phtyriase a son dernier rongé,
    Un qui de plomb voudra este cupide,
    Passant le port d’Esleu sera plongé.

    English.

    The great Antony by name, but in effect sordid,
    Of Phtyriasis shall at last be eaten up,
    One that shall be covetous of Lead,
    Going upon Port d’Esleu shall fall into the Water.

ANNOT.

Phtyriasis in Greek is the disease called by the Latines Morbus
pedicularis, when one is devoured by Lice, as were Herodes, Sylla,
Pherecydes, and Philip II. King of Spain, &c.

As for Port d’Esleu, the question is, whether it be the proper name of
a place, or the name of a man, that shall throw another in the water.


LXXXIX.

    French.

    Trente de Londres secret conjureront,
    Contre Leur Roy, sur le pont l’Entreprise,
    Les Satellites la mort desgouteront,
    Un Roy esleu blond & natif de Frize.

    English.

    Thirty of London shall secretly conspire,
    Against their King, upon the Bridge the Plot shall be made,
    These Satellites shall taste of death,
    A King shall be elected, fair, and born in Friezeland.

ANNOT.

Here may be alleadged that passage of Scripture, There is nothing so
secret but shall be revealed; for here is plainly told the number of
those wicked persons, who conspired against their lawful Sovereign King
Charles I. of blessed memory, as also the place where the Plot was
first laid; for it is well known that they used to assemble at the Bear
at the Bridge foot.


XC.

    French.

    Les deux copies au murs ne pourront joindre,
    Dans cet instant trembler Milan, Thesin,
    Faim soif, doutance si fort les viendront prendre,
    Chair, pain, ne vivres nauront un seul boucin.

    English.

    The two Armies shall not be able to joyn by the Walls,
    At that instant Milan and Thesin shall tremble,
    Hunger, thirst, and fear shall so seize upon them,
    They shall not have a bit of meat, bread, nor victuals.

ANNOT.

Milan is a City in Italy, and Thesin is the River that passeth by
it.


XCI.

    French.

    Au Duc Gaulois contraint battre au Duelle,
    La nef de Mole, Monech naprochera,
    Tort accuse, prison perpetuelle,
    Son Fils regner avant mort taschera.

    English.

    A French Duke compelled to fight a Duel,
    The Ship of Mole shall not come near Monaco,
    Wrongfully accused shall have a perpetual Prison,
    His son shall endeavour to Reign before his death.

ANNOT.

To understand this Stanza, we must suppose four Histories, Paradin
relateth the first, which is, that the French and Spanish Armies
having their Winter quarters in the Dukedome of Milan, Anno 1555.

The Marquess of Pescaire, sent word to the Duke of Nemours, by a
French Gentleman, that he and three more desired to break a Lance with
him upon the borders of Ast.

The Duke accepted the challenge, without giving notice to the Marquess of
Brissac, then General of the French Army, who was very angry at it,
nevertheless he advised the Duke to go, but not with a Guilt and light
Armour, but with a wrong one, such as became a Cavaliero, which he did
not do, nor the other three that went with him: whence it came, that the
Lord Classe a French man, running against Malespine, was wounded
to death in the shoulder; nevertheless one of the seconds to the Duke
of Nemours, the Lord Moncha killed upon the place Carassa, Nephew
to pope Marcel II. and the Lord Manoa, one of the Duke of Nemours
party, falling from his Horse a little wounded, broke his neck.

As for the Duke of Nemours, he ran twice against the said Marquess,
without hitting one another, but at the third time they both brake their
Lances, without doing any harm. Thus, the French Duke was compelled to
fight a Duel.

We have the second History from Turpin, and many others, which is,
that the Marquess of Masseran, having put himself into the King of
France’s service, in hopes to have the Government of Bielais; and
proving a Traitor, the Marshal of Brissac, who had discovered his
perfidiousness, resolved to take him in his house of Gaillany, which he
had fortified to secure his retreat after his Treason.

The Lord de Termes was commanded to do it, which he did so dexterously,
that he took him into his house after dinner, and then compelled him
presently to surrender the Castle of Jamaglia, the Marquess obeying,
sent thither presently his son Claudius, to put it into the hands of
the Lords de la Mante, and of Villars.

These two viewing the Castle, to observe the places that might be
fortified, and going from room to room, heard a lamentable voice, crying.
Have mercy upon me. They caused presently the Prison doors to be
opened, and found a poor Gentleman of Vercelle, whom the Marquess had
detained there 18 years, for endeavouring to serve an execution against
him, in the Duke of Savoy’s behalf.

And it is remarkable that his Imprisonment was all this while concealed,
so that no body ever heard of it, in so much that his friends suspecting
he had been killed by one of his enemies, they prosecuted him so hard,
that after much tortering, he confessed what he had not done, and was
consequently put to death in the presence of the said Marquess of
Masseran, who knew the Countrey. Thus we see one wrongfully accused
that was executed, and this Gentlemans Imprisonment, which was to be
perpetual.

After this, they carryed the poor Gentleman almost all naked, and being
nothing but skin and bones, to the Lord of Termes, who caused him to be
clothed, and gave him Money to go back to his friends.

The third History is, that the Duke of Nemours Son was one of the chief
ring-leaders of the League against Henry IV. and did what he could
before he dyed to get the Kingdom of France, endeavouring first to make
himself Sovereign Prince of Lion, Forrest, and Beaucolois.

The fourth History is, that at the latter end of the year 1555. the Lord
la Mole carrying to Rome the Cardinals of Tournon and Lorrain,
went directly to the Island of Corsica, whence he drew some Forces,
which he joyned to his, and to those of Monluc, and would not Land at
Monaco for some reasons, but went directly to Civita Vecchia. By this
we understand that Verse of the Stanza. The Ship of the Mole shall not
come near ~Monaco~.


XCII.

    French.

    Teste trenchée du vaillant Capitaine,
    Sera jettée devant son adversaire,
    Son corps pendu de la Classe a l’Antenne,
    Confus fuira par rames avent contraire.

    English.

    The head cut off the valliant Captain
    Shall be thrown down before his adversary,
    His body hanged at the Sails Yard,
    Confused, they shall fly with Oars against the Wind.

ANNOT.

These words are plain enough, though no body can tell whether the thing
is past already, or shall come to pass hereafter.


XCIII.

    French.

    Un Serpent veu proche du lict Royal,
    Sera par Dame nuict chien n’abageronts
    Lors nastre en France un Prince tant Royal,
    Du Ciel venu tous les Princes verront.

    English.

    A Serpent shall be seen near the Royal bed,
    By a Lady in the night, the Dogs shall not bark,
    Then shall be born in France a Prince so Royal,
    Come from Heaven all the Princes shall see it.

ANNOT.

This seemeth to be an allusion to the Birth of Alexander the great;
for it is said, that when his mother Olympia proved with Child of him,
there was seen in her Bed, and about her Bed a great Serpent, which was
the presage of his future greatness: therefore our Author also will have,
that when such a Prodigie shall appear in France, that then shall be
born such a Prince as he mentioneth here: the circumstances are, that
this Serpent shall be seen by a Lady in the night time, and that the Dogs
of the house shall not bark at him.


XCIV.

    French.

    Deux grand, freres seront chassez d’Espagne,
    Laisné vaincu soubs les Monts Pyrænæes,
    Rougis Mer, Rhosne, sang Leman, d’Alemagne,
    Narbon, Blyterre, d’Agath contaminées.

    English.

    Two great Brothers shall be driven from Spain,
    The elder of them shall be overcome under the Pyrenean Mountains
    Bloody Sea, Rhosne, Blood Leman of Germany,
    Narbon, Bliterre of Agath polluted.

ANNOT.

The two first Verses are easily understood by those that know the
Pyrenean Mountains, to be those that part Spain from France. The
two last Verses signifie there shall be bloody Wars in those places; the
Rhosne is a swift River of France, that passeth through the City
of Lyons; Leman is the Lake of Geneva, and Narbon is a City of
Languedock.


XCV.

    French.

    Le Regne a deux laissé bien peu tiendront,
    Trois ans sept mois passez feront la guerre,
    Les deux vestales contre rebelleront,
    Victor puisnay en Armorique Terre.

    English.

    The Kingdom being left to two, they shall keep it but a little while,
    Three years and seven months being past, they shall make War,
    The two Vestals shall rebel against them,
    The youngest shall be Conquerour in the Armorick Countrey.

ANNOT.

This signifies, that a Kingdom shall be left to two, who shall keep it
but a little while, about the space before mentioned.

By the two Vestals that shall rebel, are to be understood two Nuns, who
having Interest in the state by their nearness of blood, shall challenge
a title in the Kingdom. The last Verse signifies, that the youngest that
contended for the Kingdom, shall overcome the eldest, in the Province of
Gascony.


XCVI.

    French.

    La sœur aisnée de l’Isle Britannique,
    Quinze ans devant le frere aura naissance,
    Par son promis moyenant verifique,
    Succedera au Regne de Balance.

    English.

    The eldest Sister of the Brittain Island,
    Shall be born fifteen years before her Brother,
    By what is promised her, and help of the truth,
    She shall succeed in the Kingdom of Libra.

ANNOT.

This signifies, that the Princess born so long after her Brother, shall
be married to a King of France, which is understood here by the Kingdom
of Libra; therefore the last King Lewis the XIII. was called the
Just, because born under the Sign of Libra.


XCVII.

    French.

    L’An que Mercure, Mars, Venus retrograde,
    Du grand Monarque la ligne ne faillit,
    Esleu du peuple Lusitant pres de Pactole,
    Qu’en Paix & Regne viendra fort enveillir.

    English.

    When Mercury, Mars and Venus shall retrograde,
    The Line of the great Monarch shall be wanting,
    He shall be elected by the Lusitanians near Pactole,
    And shall Reign in Peace a good while.

ANNOT.

This signifies the late change of state in Portugal, when they threw
off the Spanish yoke, and chose a King amongst themselves, John the
IV. Duke of Branganza, Father to the present Queen of England;
for by the Lusitanians are meant the Portugals, so called from
their Countreys name Lusitania; Pactoles is the River that runs by
Lisbonne, otherwise called Tagus, in Greek χροσοροος from the Sands.


XCVIII.

    French.

    Les Albanois passeront dedans Rome,
    Moyennant Langres demipiler affubles,
    Marquis & Duc ne pardonnes a l’homme,
    Feu, sang, morbilles point d’eau, faillir les blés.

    English.

    The Albanians shall pass through Rome,
    By the means of Langres covered with half Helmets,
    Marquess and Duke shall spare no man,
    Fire, blood, small Pox, Water shall fail us, also Corn.

ANNOT.

The meaning is, that when the people of Albania lying between the
Venetian Territories, and Grecia, shall come to Rome, by the means
of a Bishop of Langres, who is a Duke and Peer of France; being
covered with half Helmets, a kind of a Cap that they wear in War; then
shall be fire, blood, small Pox, and want of Corn.


XCIX.

    French.

    L’Aisné vaillant de la fille du Roy,
    Repoussera si profond les Celtiques,
    Qu’il mettra Foudres, combien en tel arroy,
    Peu & loing puis profond es Hesperiques.

    English.

    The valliant eldest son of the daughter of the King,
    Shall beat back so far those of Flanders,
    That he will cast Lightnings, O how many in such orders
    Little and far, after shall go deep in Spain.

ANNOT.

This is scarce to be understood of any body, but the present King of
France Lewis the XIV. who was the elder son, and born of Queen Ann,
Daughter to the King of Spain, who by his valour and fortune made last
year such progress in the Conquest of Flanders, that it hath caused
admiration in every body; insomuch that is he do the like this year,
it may be probably suspected, he will afterwards go deep into Spain
according to the contents of this Prophecy.


C.

    French.

    Du feu Celeste au Royal edifice,
    Quand la lumiere de Mars defaillira,
    Sept mois grand Guerre, mort gent de malefice,
    Rouen, Eureux au Roy ne faillira.

    English.

    Fire shall fall from the skies on the Kings Palace,
    When Mars’s light shall be Ecclipsed,
    A great War shall be for seven months, people shall die by witchcraft.
    Rouen, and Eureux shall not be wanting to the King.

ANNOT.

The meaning is, that when Mars is Ecclipsed, the Lightning shall fall
on some of the King of Frances Palaces, then shall be a great War, for
the space of seven Months, and many shall die by witchcraft; and Rouen
the chief City of Normandy, and Eureux another of the same province,
shall stick fast to the Kings Interest.




THE PROPHECIES OF Michael Nostradamus.

CENTURY V.


I.

    French.

    Avant venue de ruine Celtique,
    Dedans le Temple d’eux parlementeront,
    Poignard cœur d’un monté au coursier & picque,
    Sans faire bruit le grand enterreront.

    English.

    Before the coming of the ruine of Flanders,
    Two shall discourse together in the Church,
    Dagger in the heart by one, on Horse-back and Spurring,
    Without noise they shall bury the great one.

ANNOT.

This is a further specification of the whole ruine of Flanders, before
which it shall happen, saith our Author, that two shall talk together in
the Church, and one shall stabb the other with a Dagger, and then take
Horse, and fly, the dead one being buried without Pompe or Ceremony.


II.

    French.

    Sept conjurez au Banquet feront luire,
    Centre les trois le Fer hors de Navire.
    L’un les deux classes au grand fera conduire,
    Quand par le mail dernier au front luy tire.

    English.

    Seven Conspirators at a Banquet shall make their Iron glister
    Against three, out of a Ship:
    One shall carry the two Fleets to the great one,
    When in the Palle-malle the last shall shoot him in the forehead.

ANNOT.

The two first Verses foretell a Conspiracy of seven against three, one of
which seven shall carry both Fleets to some eminent person, at which time
he shall be shot in the forehead by the last of the seven.


III.

    French.

    Le Successeur de la Duché viendra,
    Beaucoup plus outre que la Mer de Toscane,
    Gauloise branche la Florence tiendra,
    Dans son Giron d’accord nautique Rane.

    English.

    The Successor to the Dukedom shall come,
    Far beyond the Tuscane Sea,
    A French branch shall hold Florence
    In its Lap, to which the Sea-frog shall agree.

ANNOT.

By the two first Verses is meant a lawful Successor to the Duke of
Tuscany who shall come to recover the said Dukedom, which shall then be
in the possession of the French.

It is hard to guess what he means by the Sea-frog, unless it be some
considerable Prince at Sea, which shall then be in League with the
French.


IV.

    French.

    Le gros Mastin de Cité dechassé,
    Sera fasché de l’estrange Alliance,
    Apres aux Champs avoir le Cerf chassé,
    Le Loup & l’Ours se donront defiance.

    English.

    The great Mastif being driven from the City,
    Shall be angry at the strange Alliance,
    After he shall have hunted the Hart in the Fields,
    The Wolf, and the Bear shall defie one another.

ANNOT.

By the strange Alliance is meant that which Cromwel had with France,
to the prejudice of his Majesty of England, who is here meant by the
Mastif, a Creature, for which England hath been famous.

By the Wolf and the Bear are meant the French King and the Switzers,
or those of Savoy.


V.

    French.

    Sous ombre faincte d’oster de servitude,
    Peuple & Cité l’usurpera luy-mesme,
    Pire sera par fraus de jeune pute,
    Livré au Champ lisant le faux proësme.

    English.

    Under the fained shadow of freeing people from slavery,
    He shall usurpe the people and City for himself;
    He shall do worse by the deceit of a young Whore,
    For he shall be betrayed in the field reading a false proem.

ANNOT.

The two first are plain, and may be referred to the foregoing Stanza
concerning Oliver.

The last Verses are plain, and I leave them to the judicious Reader.


VI.

    French.

    Au Roy l’Augur sur le chef le main mettre,
    Viendra prier pour la Paix Italique,
    A la main gauche viendra changer le Sceptre,
    De Roy viendra Empereur pacifique.

    English.

    The Augur shall come to put his hand upon the Kings head,
    And pray for the Peace of Italy,
    In the left hand he shall change the Scepter,
    Of a King he shall become a peaceful Emperour.

ANNOT.

Although the Augur in Latine signifieth one that telleth events of
matters by the flying voices, or sitting of Birds, yet it is taken also
(as here) for a Prelat or Clergyman, who shall put his hand upon a Kings
head, and pray for the peace of Italy, and shall put a Scepter in his
hand, and install him Emperour, what King this should be, is easie to be
conjectured by the Author, being a French-man, and setting down a King
without any Epithite, and this Prophecy is a confirmation of one before
of the same nature.


VII.

    French.

    Du Triumuir seront trouvez les os,
    Cherchant profond Thresor ænigmatique,
    Ceux d’alentour ne seront en repos,
    Ce concaver Marbre & plomb Metallique.

    English.

    The bones of the Triumuir shall be found out,
    When they shall seek for a deep and ænigmatical Treasure,
    Those there about shall not be in rest,
    This concavity shall be Marble and Metallick Lead.

ANNOT.

I suppose none so ignorant in the Roman History, but knows, that there
was a combination between Octavius Cæsar, Marcus Antonius, and
Lepidus, to make themselves Masters of the Roman Empire, and to
divide it amongst themselves, this plot being made by three, was made by
the Triumuiri, the meaning then is, that when they shall go to seek for
a Treasure, they shall find the bones of one of those three persons, and
in that cavity that they shall have digged, they shall find Marble and
Lead.


VIII.

    French.

    Sera laissé le feu vif, mort caché,
    Dedans les Globes horrible espouventable,
    De nuict a classe Cité en poudre lasché,
    La Cité a feu, l’ennemy favourable.

    English.

    The fire shall be left burning, the dead man shall be hid,
    Within the Globes terrible and fearful,
    By night the Fleet shall shoot against the City,
    The City shall be on fire, the enemy shall be favourable unto it.

ANNOT.

The two Verses signifie, that fire shall be hid within Globes, I suppose
them to be Granado’s, or a Mine.

The two last Verses signifie, that the Fleet in the Harbour, or near it,
shall set the City on fire, and that they shall come out of the Fleet to
help to quench the fire, and so shall the enemy be favourable.


IX.

    French.

    Jusques au fond la grand Arche Maluë,
    Par chef Captif l’amy anticipé,
    Naistra de Dame front, face cheveluë,
    Lors par astuce Duc a mort attrapé

    English.

    To the bottom of the great Arch Malüe,
    By a Captain that is a Prisoner, the friend shall be anticipated,
    One shall be born of a Lady with a hoary face and forehead,
    Then by craft shall a Duke be put to death.

ANNOT.

The meaning of the first is unknown to me: I leave it to the Reader.

The sense of the last is as obvious to the meanest capacity, as the two
precedent are obscure.


X.

    French.

    Un chef Celtique dans le conflict blessé,
    Aupres de Cave, voiant, siens mort abattre,
    De sang & playes & d’ennemis pressé,
    Est se couru par incogneus de quattre.

    English.

    A General of Flanders wounded in Battle,
    Near a Cellar, seeing death to overthrow his people,
    Being much oppressed with blood, wounds and enemies,
    Is succoured by four unknown.

ANNOT.

This needeth no further interpretation, than that it seemeth to be near
its event.


XI.

    French.

    Mer par solaires seure passera
    Ceux de Venus tiendront toute l’Afrique,
    Leur Regne plus Saturne n’occupera,
    Et changera la part Asiatique.

    English.

    By solaries she shall pass secure,
    Those of Venus shall hold all Africa,
    Saturn shall hold their Kingdom no longer,
    And shall change the Asiatick part.

ANNOT.

This is so obscure in words and sense, that I can judge no more than that
it signifies a great change in Africa and Asia, which I suppose is
already come to pass by Taffaletta.


XII.

    French.

    Au pres du lac Leman sera conduite,
    Par garse estrange Cite voulant trahir,
    Avant son meurtre a Ausbourg la grand suite,
    Et ceux du Rhin la viendront envahir.

    English.

    Near the Leman Lake shall be a Plot,
    By a strange Whore to betray a City,
    Before she be kill’d her great retinue will come to Ausbourg,
    And those of the Rhine shall come to invade her.

ANNOT.

We have said often before, that the Leman Lake is that of Geneva. The
rest is so manifest, that it needs no interpretation.


XIII.

    French.

    Par grand fureur le Roy Romain Belgique,
    Veexer voudra par phalange Barbare,
    Furent grinssant chassera gent Lybique,
    Depuis Pannons jusque Hercules la bare.

    English.

    Through great anger the Roman Belgick King,
    Shall come to vex with Barbarian Troops,
    Gnashing with fury, he shall draw away the Lybian people,
    From the Pannons as far as Hercules.

ANNOT.

By the Roman Belgick King, is understood Philip the second King of
Spain; because he was made King in Flanders, by his father Charles
V.

The second Verse signifieth the diverse Nations that his Army was
composed of.

In the third, by the Lybian people are understood the Jews, which he
drove away from Spain into Africa.

The Pannons are the people of Hungary, called Pannones, and the
meaning that he drove them out as far as Hercules Pillar, at the mouth
of the Straits, signifies the great expulsion he made of them, which were
about the number of 200000.


XIV.

    French.

    Saturne & Mars en Leo Espagne captifue,
    Par chef Lybique au conflict attrapé,
    Proche de Malte, Herede Prinse vive,
    Et Romain Sceptre sera par Coq frappé.

    English.

    Saturn and Mars being in Leo, Spain shall be captive,
    By a Lybian General taken in the Battle,
    Near Malta, an Heirse shall be taken alive,
    And the Roman Scepter shall be strucken by the Cock.

ANNOT.

By the Cock is meant the King of France. The rest is plain.


XV.

    French.

    En navigant Captif prins grand pontife,
    Grand apres faillir les clercs tumultuez,
    Second esleu absent son bien debife,
    Son favory Bastard a mort tué.

    English.

    In Sailing a Pope shall be taken Captive;
    After which, shall be a great uproar amongst the Clergy,
    A second absent elected, consumeth his goods,
    His favourite Bastard shall be killed.

ANNOT.

These Verses signifie no more, but that a Pope going by water, shall
be taken Prisoner, for which, all the Clergy shall be in disorder, and
elect a new one, who shall consume his Goods, and shall have a favourite
Bastard, that shall be killed.


XVI.

    French.

    A son haut prix plus la larme Sabæe,
    D’humaine chair par mort en cendre mettre,
    L’Isle Pharos par Croisars perturbée,
    Alors qua Rhodes paroistra dur espectre.

    English.

    The Sabæan Tear shall be no more at its high price,
    To turn humane flesh by death into ashes,
    The Island Pharos shall be troubled by Croisars,
    When at Rhodes shall a hard Phantasm appear.

ANNOT.

The Sabæan Tear, is Frankincense, so called; because it is the Gum of a
Tree that groweth in that Countrey, whence the Poet saith,

    India mittit ebur, molles sua thura Sabæi.

The meaning therefore of the two first Verses, is, that Frankincense
shall be no more so dear as it hath been; because it shall be no more
used, in enbalming and burning of dead bodies.

The third verse saith, the Island Pharos (which is that little Island
that lyeth before the Harbour of Alexandria) shall be troubled by
Croisars, that is, Christians, when there shall appear a Phantasme, or
a Vision shall be seen at Rhodes.


XVII.

    French.

    De nuit passant le Roy pres d’une Andronne,
    Celuy de Cipres & principal de guerre,
    Le Roy failly la main fuit long du Rhosne,
    Les conjurez liront la a mort mettre.

    English.

    The King going along by night near an Andronne,
    He of Cyprus and chief of the War,
    The King having missed the hand, runneth away along by the Rhosne,
    The Conspirators shall put him to death there.

ANNOT.

I could not find what he meaneth by Andronne, therefore I believe it is
a barbarous and forged word, which the Author hath foisted in, to make
the first Verses rhime with the word Rhosne in the third Verse, which
is a famous River in France.


XVIII.

    French.

    De duel mourra l’infelix profligé,
    Celebrera son victrix l’Hecatombe,
    Pristine loy franc edict redigé,
    Le mur & Prince septiesme ira au tombe.

    English.

    The unhappy being overcome, shall die for grief,
    His Victrix shall celebrate the Hecatomb,
    The former law and free Edict shall be brought again,
    The wall and seventh Prince shall go to the Grave.

ANNOT.

Victrix is a Latine word, and the Feminine Gender of victor, and
signifieth a woman that is victorious; Hecatomb is a Sacrifice, wherein
an hundred Oxen are killed.


XIX.

    French.

    Le grand Royal d’Or, d’Airain augmenté,
    Rompu la pache par jeune, ouverte guerre,
    Peuple affligé par un chef lamenté,
    De sang barbare sera couverte Terre;

    English.

    The great Golden Royal, being increased with Copper,
    The agreement being broken by a young man, there shall be open War,
    People afflicted by the loss of a General lamented,
    The ground shall be covered with barbarous blood.

ANNOT.

By the great golden Royal, is understood (if I mistake not) a King rich
in Gold and Silver, who being joyned with one rich in Copper, shall make
open War against one that shall have broken his agreement.

Quære: Whether this came not to pass when Gustaphus Adolphus King
of Sweden and rich in Brass, being helped by the French Gold and
Silver; was not the General so much lamented, after he had almost ruined
the Emperour, whom he did challenge to have broken his word, and had
covered the ground with German and Swedish blood.


XX.

    French.

    De la les Alpes grand Armée passera,
    Un peu devant naistra monstre vapin,
    Prodigieux, & subit tournera,
    Le grand Toscan a son lieu plus propin.

    English.

    Beyond the Alpes shall a great Army go, and
    A little before shall be born a Vapin Monster,
    Prodigious and suddenly the great Toscan
    Shall return to his nearest place.

ANNOT.

What the Author meaneth by vapin, is unknown to me, as for the word
propin, it is a diminutive of the Latine word propinquus, by the
figure of Rhetorick, called Tmesis.


XXI.

    French.

    Par le trespas du Monarque Latin,
    Ceux quil aura par Regne secourus,
    Le feu livra divisé le butin,
    La mort publique aux hardis accourus.

    English.

    By the death of the Latine Monarque,
    Those that he shall have succoured in his Reign.
    The fire shall shine, the booty shall be divided,
    The stout comers in shall be put to publick death.

ANNOT.

Every body may judge of this as well as I, therefore to trouble my self
it should be to no purpose.


XXII.

    French.

    Avant qu’a Rome grand aye rendu l’Ame,
    Effrayeur grande a l’Armée estrangere,
    Par escadrons l’embusche pres de Parme.
    Puis les deux rouges ensemble feront chere.

    English.

    Before that a great man yeildeth up his Soul at Rome,
    The Army of strangers shall be put into a great fright,
    By Squadrons the ambush shall be near Parma.
    After that, the two red ones shall make good cheer together.

ANNOT.

Here is nothing difficult, but what he meaneth by the two red ones, for
my part I suppose them to be two Cardinals.


XXIII.

    French.

    Les deux contens seront unis ensemble,
    Quand la pluspart a Mars seront conjoints,
    Le grand d’Affrique en effrayeur & tremble,
    Duumuirat par la chassé desjoint.

    English.

    The two contented shall be united together,
    When the most part shall be joyned to Mars,
    The great one of Africa shall be in fear and terrour,
    Duumuirat shall by the pursuit be disjointed.

ANNOT.

This signifieth, that two powerful Princes shall joyn together, to
make War in Africa, which shall be much terrified at it, but this
Duumuirat, that is, this agreement of two Princes shall be broken off,
and disjoyned.


XXIV.

    French.

    Le Regne & Roy soubs Venus eslevé,
    Saturne aura sur Jupiter Empire,
    La Loy & Regne par Jupiter levé,
    Par Saturnins endurera le pire.

    English.

    The Kingdom and King being raised under Venus,
    Saturn shall have power over Jupiter,
    The Law and Reign raised by Jupiter,
    Shall be put to the worse by the Saturnins.

ANNOT.

I shall leave this to be expounded by those that have more skill in
Astronomy then I have.


XXV.

    French.

    Le Prince Arabe, Mars, Sol, Venus, Lion,
    Regne d’Eglise par Mer succombera,
    Devers la Perse bien pres d’un Million,
    Bizance, Ægypte, Ver. Serp. invadera.

    English.

    The Arabian Prince, Mars, Sol, Venus, Leo,
    The Kingdom of the Church shall be overcome by Sea
    Towards Persia very near a Million,
    Byzance, Ægypt, Ver. Serp. shall invade.

ANNOT.

This is of the same nature as the foregoing, therefore I leave it to the
same expositors.


XXVI.

    French.

    La gent esclave par un heur Martial,
    Viendra en haut degré tant eslevée,
    Changeront Prince, naistra un Provincial,
    Passer la Mer, copie aux Monts levée.

    English.

    The Slavish Nation shall by a Martial luck
    Be raised to so high a degree,
    That they shall change their Prince, and elect one among themselves,
    They shall cross the Sea with an Army raised in the Mountains.

ANNOT.

This is so plain, that it needeth no interpretation.


XXVII.

    French.

    Par feu & armes non loin de la Mar negro,
    Viendra de Perse occuper Trebisonde,
    Trembler Pharos, Metelin, Sol alegro,
    De sang Arabe d’Adrie couvert l’Onde.

    English.

    By Fire and Sword not far from the black Sea,
    They shall come from Persia to seize upon Trebisonde,
    Pharos and Methelin shall quake, Sun be merry,
    The Sea of Adria shall be covered with Arabian blood.

ANNOT.

This Prophecy foretelleth clearly and plainly, that the Persians shall
come to invade the Turkish dominions, a part of which is the Empire
of Trebisond, and that Pharos and Methelin two Islands in the
Mediterranean Sea, shall quake for fear.

As also that the Adriatick Sea, which is that Sea that belongeth to the
Venetians shall be covered with Turkish blood, at which the Author is
so jocund, as with an exclamation he inviteth the Sun to be merry, and
rejoyce at it.


XXVIII.

    French.

    Le bras pendu & la jambe liée,
    Visage pasle, au sein poignard caché,
    Trois qui seront jurez de la meslée,
    Au grand de Genes sera le Fer lasché.

    English.

    The arm hanging, and the leg bound,
    With a pale face, a Dagger in the bosom,
    Three that shall be sworn to the fray,
    To the great one of Genoa the Iron shall be darted.

ANNOT.

This manifestly foretelleth a conspiracy of three men against the Duke
of Genoa, one of which three men, under the shew of a sore Arm, and
an impotent Leg, shall carry a Dagger in his bosom, with which he shall
stabb the said Duke.


XXIX.

    French.

    La liberté ne sera recouvrée,
    L’Occupera noir, fier, vilain inique;
    Quand la matiere du Pont sera ouvrée,
    D’Hister, Venise faschée la Republique.

    English.

    The liberty shall not be recovered,
    It shall be occupied, by a black, fierce, and wicked villain;
    When the work of the Hister-Bridge shall be ended,
    The Venetian Common-wealth shall be vexed.

ANNOT.

This Stanza is divided into two parts, the first of which is comprehended
in the two first Verses, viz. that the liberty of some politick body
(he nameth not which) shall not be recovered, but shall be seized upon,
by a black, fierce, and wicked villain.

The second part is contained in the two last Verses, wherein he saith,
that the Common-wealth of Venice shall be in trouble, when the Bridge
made over the River Hister shall be finished.


XXX.

    French.

    Tout a l’entour de la grande Cité,
    Seront Soldats logez par Champs & Villes,
    Donner l’assaut Paris, Rome incité,
    Sur le Pont sera faite grand pille.

    English.

    Round about the great City,
    Soldiers shall lye in the Fields and Towns,
    Paris shall give the Assault, Rome shall be attached;
    Then upon the Bridge shall be great plundering.

ANNOT.

This is concerning the taking and sacking of Rome, by the Duke of
Bourbon, General of Charles V. Forces, therefore he saith that
Paris shall give the Assault, because the said Duke of Bourbon was a
Frenchman.


XXXI.

    French.

    Par Terre Attique chef de la sapience,
    Qui de present est la Rose du Monde,
    Pont ruiné & sa grand preeminence,
    Sera subdite & naufrage des Ondes.

    English.

    In the Countrey of Attica which is the head of wisdom,
    And now is the Rose of the World,
    A Bridge shall be ruinated with its great preeminence,
    It shall be subdued, and made a wrack by the Waves.

ANNOT.

He foretelleth the destruction of a famous Bridge in the Countrey of
Attica, of which Athens is the chief City, and because it was always
famous for learning, he calleth it here the head of Wisdom; and that
Wisdom, the Rose of the World.


XXXII.

    French.

    Ou tout bon est, tout bien Soleil & Lune,
    Est abondant, sa ruine s’approche,
    Le Ciel s’advance a changer ta fortune,
    En mesme estat que la septiesme Roche.

    English.

    Where all well is, all good O Sun and Moon,
    Is existent, his ruine draweth near,
    The Heaven is making hast to change thy fortune,
    Into the same case as the seventh Rock is.

ANNOT.

By this dark Stanza, the Author seemeth to foretell the woful condition
of a Countrey that was happy before, but shall fall to ruine, I suspect
he intended France, because being a Frenchman he did not name it,
for I think there was never such a change in the world as was in that
Kingdom, in the time of the Civil Wars between the Roman Catholicks, and
the Protestants.


XXXIII.

    French.

    Des principaux de Cité rebellée,
    Qui tiendront fort pour liberté r’avoir,
    Detrencher masles, infœlice meslée!
    Cris, hurlemens a Nantes pitieux voir.

    English.

    Of the chief men in a rebelled City,
    Who shall stand out to recover their liberty,
    The Males shall be cut in pieces, O unhappy quarrel!
    Cries and houlings, it shall be pity to see at Nantes.

ANNOT.

The Author applyeth this Prophecie to the City of Nantes in Britany,
but want of Books that treat of the History of that Countrey; I could
neither satisfie my self, nor the Reader, if this hath come to pass
already or not.


XXXIV.

    French.

    Du plus profond de l’occident Anglois,
    Ou est le chef de l’Isle Britanique,
    Entrera classe en Garonne par Blois,
    Par Vin & Sel faux cachez aux barriques.

    English.

    From the deepest Westerly part of England,
    Where the chief of the Britain Island is,
    A Fleet shall come into the Garonne by Blaye,
    By Wine and Salt fire shall be hidden in Barrels.

ANNOT.

There is a notable and sensible error in the French Copy, and without
reforming it, the sense is not only obscure, but also impossible; for
instead of Blois, which the Author hath put here, I suppose to make the
rime good, it must be written Blaye, which is a Sea Town of the mouth
of the River Garonne, and Blois is a mid-Land Town, upon the River
Loire, about a hundred Leagues distant from the other.

The rest signifieth no more, but that there shall be some Warlike
Stratagem made use of by the French (understood here by the names of
Wine and Salt) in puting fire into Barrels.


XXXV.

    French.

    Par Cité franche de la grand Mer Seline,
    Qui porte encor l’estomach la pierre,
    Angloise classe viendra soubs la bruine,
    Prendre un rameau de grand ouverte guerre.

    English.

    By a free City of the Selyne Sea,
    Which carrieth yet the stone in the Stomach,
    An English Fleet shall come under a fog,
    To take a branch of great open War.

ANNOT.

What should the Author mean by the free City of the great Seline Sea
that carryeth yet the stone in the Stomach, is hard to guess; for my
part I believe it to be Venice. First, because by the Seline Sea, he
always understands the Mediterranean; because the great Turks name in
our Authors time was Selyn, who was Master of the greatest part of it.
Secondly, there is no other free City so considerable as this. Thirdly,
by the stone in the Stomach, may be understood, the Pillars that are in
the Piazza of St. Mark, and as it were in the Centre of Venice,
as the Stomach is in the Body. The sense therefore is this, as I take
it, that a considerable Fleet shall come to Venice, or rather to
Molamocco, which is the Harbour, and there take a branch of great open
War, that is, to be either against the Venetians, or against the Turk
in their behalf.


XXXVI.

    French.

    De Sœur le frere par simulte feintise,
    Viendra mesler rosee en Mineral,
    Sur la placente donne a vieille tardive,
    Meurt le goustant, sera simple rural.

    English.

    The Brother of the Sister, with a fained dissimulation,
    Shall mix Dew with Mineral,
    In a Cake given to a slow old woman,
    She dieth tasting of, the deed shall be simple, and Countrey like.

ANNOT.

This foretelleth a notable poisoning that shall be done by a Brother
upon his Sister, which, because she died not fast enough, according to
his mind: and therefore called her slow, he would set her forward with
a poisoned Cake, the Poison was Mineral, and therefore Arsenick or
Sublimate, mixed with Manna, called here Dew; because Manna is
nothing but a Dew, condensed upon the Bark of a certain Tree; the
Conclusion is, that the woman shall die eating of it, though the meat
seemed to be simple and rural.


XXXVII.

    French.

    Trois sens seront d’un vouloir & accord,
    Qui pour venir au bout de leur attainte,
    Vingt mois apres tous eux & leurs records,
    Leur Roy trahy simulant haine, feinte.

    English.

    Three hundred shall be of one mind and agreement,
    That they may compass their ends,
    twenty months after by all them and their partners,
    Their King shall be betrayed, by dissembling a fained hatred.

ANNOT.

The difficulty of meeting in any Countrey three hundred men of one mind,
hath perswaded me that our Author writ this for England; but by reason
there hath been since a general pardon, I will keep my mind to my self.


XXXVIII.

    French.

    Ce grand Monarque qu’au mort succedera,
    Donnera vie illicite & lubrique,
    Par nonchalance a tous concedera,
    Qua la parfin faudra la loy Salique.

    English.

    The great Monarch that shall succeed to the great one,
    Shall lead a Life unlawfull, and lecherous,
    By carelesness he shall give to all,
    So that in Conclusion the Salique Law shall fail.

ANNOT.

This hath a Relation to the precedent Stanza, therefore, &c.


XXXIX.

    French.

    Du vray rameau de fleur de Lis issu,
    Mis & loge heritier d’Hetrurie,
    Son sang antique de longue main tissu,
    Fera Florence florir en l’Armoirie.

    English.

    Issued out of the true branch of the City,
    He shall be set for Heir of Hetruria,
    His ancient blood waved by a long while,
    Shall cause Florence to flourish in the Scutcheon.

ANNOT.

This is only in commendation of the Family of the Medicis, and of their
Alliance with the Crown of France; for Catharine of Medicis, wife
to Henry II. was Queen of France when our Author lived.


XL.

    French.

    Le sang Roial sera si tresmeslé,
    Contraints seront Gaulois de l’Hesperie,
    On attendra que terme soit coulé,
    Et que memoire de la voix soit perie.

    English.

    The Royal blood shall be so much mixed,
    The French shall be constrained by the Spaniards,
    They shall stay till the term be past,
    And the remembrance of the voice be over.

ANNOT.

This only signifieth a strict Union between the French and the
Spaniards, by several Alliances.


XLI.

    French.

    Nay soubs les ombres & journée nocturne,
    Séra en Regne & bonté Souveraine,
    Fera renaistre son sang de l’antique Urne,
    Renouvelant siecle d’Or pour l’airain.

    English.

    Being born in the shadows and nocturnal time,
    He shall be a Soveraign in Kingdom and bounty,
    He shall cause his blood to come again from the ancient Urn,
    Renewing a golden Age instead of a brazen one.

ANNOT.

This foretelleth the greatness and goodness of a Prince that shall be
born in the beginning of the night.


XLII.

    French.

    Mars eslevé en son plus haut befroy,
    Fera retraire les Allobrox de France,
    La gent Lombarde fera si grand effroy,
    A ceux de l’Aigle comprins soubs la Balance.

    English.

    Mars being elevated in its higher Steeple,
    Shall cause the Allobrox to retreat from France,
    The people of Lombardy shall be in so great fear,
    Of those of the Eagle comprehended under Libra.

ANNOT.

The Allobrox are the people of Savoy. Those of the Eagle comprehended
under Libra, are the subjects of the Empire that use the French
tongue.


XLIII.

    French.

    Le grand ruine des Sacrez ne sesloigne,
    Provence, Naples, Sicile, Seez & Ponce,
    En Germanie au Rhin & la Coloigne,
    Vexez a mort par tous ceux de Mogunce.

    English.

    The great ruine of the sacred things is not far off,
    Provence, Naples, Sicily, Sez and Ponce,
    In Germany towards the Rhyne and Colen,
    They shall be vexed to death by those of Moguntia.

ANNOT.

He foretelleth the troubles that were to be shortly in those Countreys
for Religion.


XLIV.

    French.

    Par Mer le rouge sera prins the Pyrates,
    La paix sera par son moyen troublée,
    L’une & l’auare commettra par faincte acte,
    Au grand Pontife fera l’Armée d’oublée.

    English.

    By Sea the red one shall be taken by Pyrates,
    The peace by that means shall be troubled,
    He shall commit anger and coveteousness by a feigned action,
    The High Priest shall have a double Army.

ANNOT.

By the red one is understood some Cardinal that shall be taken by
Pyrates, for which the peace shall be in danger to be broken, the same
Cardinal shall by a feigned action be guilty of choler and covetousness,
and for his recovery and the defending the Rites of the Church, the Pope
shall have a double Army granted to him.


XLV.

    French.

    Le grand Empire fera tost desolé,
    Et translate pres d’Arduenne silve,
    Les deux batards par l’aisné decollé,
    Et Regnera Ænodarbnez de milve.

    English.

    The great Empire shall soon be made desolate,
    And shall be translated near the Forrest of Arden,
    The two Bastards shall have their heads cut off by the eldest son,
    And he that shall reign, shall be Ænodarbnez nosed.

ANNOT.

By the great Empire is meant that of Germany, which he says shall be
translated near the Forrest of Ardens, which is near the borders of
France. Two Bastards shall be beheaded by command of the elder Brother
of the House, and he that shall Reign shall have a reddish beard, and a
Hawks nose.


XLVI.

    French.

    Par Chapeaux rouges querelles & nouveaux schismes,
    Quand on aura esleu le Sabinois,
    On produira contre luy grands sophismes,
    Et sera Rome lessée par Albanois.

    English.

    By red Hats, quarrels and new schismes,
    When the Sabin shall be Elected,
    Great sophismes shall be produced against him,
    And Rome shall be endamaged by the Albanois.

ANNOT.

By red Hats are understood Cardinals of Rome, who shall raise great
quarrels and schismes, when a Pope of the Countrey of the Sabins (which
is near Rome) shall be Elected, against whom many things shall be
objected, and that Rome shall be endamaged by the Albanians, which
are a Warlike people, and for the most part subject to the Common-wealth
of Venice.


XLVII.

    French.

    Le grand Arabe marchera bien avant,
    Trahy sora par le Bisantinois:
    L’Antique Rhodes luy viendra au devant,
    Et plus grand mal par Austre Pannonois.

    English.

    The great Arabian shall proceed a great way,
    He shall be betrayed by the Bisantines,
    The ancient Rhodes shall come to meet him,
    And a greater evil by a South wind from Hungary.

ANNOT.

By Bisantine is understood the great Turk, Master of Constantinople,
formerly called Bysantium.


XLVIII.

    French.

    Apres la grande affliction du Sceptre,
    Deux ennemis par eux seront defaicts:
    Classes d’Affrique aux Pannons viendra naistre,
    Par Mer & Terre seront horribles Faicts.

    English.

    After the great afflictions of the Scepter,
    Two enemies shall be overcome by themselves,
    A Fleet of Affrica shall be born to the Hungarians.
    By Sea and Land shall be horrid facts.

ANNOT.

The words of this Stanza are plain, though the sense be something obscure.


XLIX.

    French.

    Nul de l’Espagne, mais de l’antique France,
    Sera esleu pour le tremblant nacelle,
    A l’ennemy sera faicte fiance,
    Qui dans son Regne sera peste cruelle.

    English.

    None out of Spain, but of the ancient France,
    Shall be Elected to govern the tottering Ship.
    The enemy shall be trusted,
    Who to his Kingdom shall be a cruel plague.

ANNOT.

The two first Verses foretell a schisme in the Church of Rome,
understood by a tottering Ship, and that a French-man shall be Elected
Pope to remedy it.

The two last Verses are easie to be understood.


L.

    French.

    L’An que les Freres du Lys seront an Aage,
    L’Un d’euz tiendra la grand Romanie:
    Trembler les Monts ouvert Latin passage,
    Bache marcher contre Fort d’Armenie.

    English.

    In the year that the Brethren of the Lillies shall be at Age,
    One of them shall hold the great Romanie:
    The Mountains shall tremble, the Latine passage shall be opened,
    A Bassha shall march against the Fort of Armenia.

ANNOT.

By the Brethren of the Lillies are meant the Heirs of the Crown of
France; the rest is plain.


LI.

    French.

    La gent de Dace, d’Angleterre, & Polone,
    Et de Boësme feront nouvelle ligue,
    Pour passer outre d’Hercules la Colonne,
    Barcins, Thyrrans dresser cruelle brigue.

    English.

    The people of Dacia, England, and Poland,
    And of Bohemia shall make a new League,
    To go beyond Hercules Pillars,
    Barcins and Thyrrens shall make a cruel plot.

ANNOT.

By Barcins he means those of Carthage, which is now Tunis, and by
the Thyrrens, those that live near that Sea.


LII.

    French.

    Un Roy sera qui donra l’opposite,
    Les exilez eslevez sur le Regne,
    De sang nager la gent caste hyppolite,
    Et florira long-temps sous telle enseigne.

    English.

    A King shall be, who shall be opponent
    To the banished persons raised upon the Kingdom,
    The chast Hippolite Nation shall swim in blood,
    And shall flourish a great while under such an Ensign.

ANNOT.

Here is Demorritus’s Well where the truth may be, but I cannot find it.


LIII.

    French.

    La Loy du Sol, & Venus contendans,
    Appropriant l’Esprit de Prephetie:
    Ne l’un ne l’autre ne seront entendus,
    Par Sol tiendra la Loy du grand Messie.

    English.

    The Law of the Sun and Venus contending,
    Appropriating the spirit of Prophecy,
    Neither one nor the other shall be heard,
    By Sol the Law of the great Messias shall subsist.

ANNOT.

This is of the same obscurity with the foregoing one.


LIV.

    French.

    Du pont Euxine, & la grand Tartarie,
    Un Roy sera qui viendra voir la Gaule,
    Transpercera Alane & l’Armenie,
    Et dans Bisance Lairra sanglante Gaule.

    English.

    From the Euxin Sea, and great Tartaria,
    A King shall come to see France,
    He shall go through Alanea and Armenia,
    And shall leave a bloody rod in Constantinople.

ANNOT.

This is so plain, that it needeth no interpretation.


LV.

    French.

    De la felice Arabie contrade,
    Maistra puissant de la loy Mahometique,
    Vexer l’Espagne, conquestre la Grenade,
    Et plus par Mera la gent Ligustique.

    English.

    Out of the Countrey of Arabia the happy,
    Shall be born a powerful man of the Mahometan Law,
    Who shall vex Spain and conquer Grenada,
    And by Sea shall come to the Ligurian Nation.

ANNOT.

The Ligurian Nation are those of Genoa.


LVI.

    French.

    Par le traspas du tres-vieillard Pontife,
    Sera esleu Romain de bon aage,
    Qui sera dit que le siege debiffe,
    Et long tiendra & de picquant courage.

    English.

    By the death of the very old high-Priest,
    Shall be a Roman elected of good age,
    Of whom it shall be said, that he dishonoureth the Seat,
    And shall live long, and be of a fierce courage.

ANNOT.

The sense and the words are plain.


LVII.

    French.

    Istra du Mont Gaulsier & Aventine,
    Qui par le trou advertira l’Armée,
    Entre deux Rocs sera prins le butin,
    De Sext. Mansol faillir la renommée.

    English.

    One shall go out of the Mountains Gaulsier and Aventine,
    Who through a hole shall give notice to the Army,
    Between two Rocks the booty shall be taken,
    Of Sext. Mansol shall loose his renown.

ANNOT.

The Mountains of Gaulsier and Aventine are two of the seven Mountains
of Rome, out of which, it seems, one shall go out to give notice to
the Army without, and the Booty of the Pope, called Sextus, shall be
taken.

But what he meaneth by Mansol, I am ignorant.


LVIII.

    French.

    De l’Aqueduct d’Uticense, Gardoing,
    Par le Forest & Mont inaccessible,
    Emmy du pont sera taché ou poing,
    La chef Nemans qui tant sera terrible.

    English.

    From the Conduit of Uticense and Gardoing,
    Through the Forrest and unaccessible Mountain,
    In the middle of the Bridge shall be tyed by the Wrist,
    The chief Nemans, that shall be so terrible.

ANNOT.

By the Conduit of Gardoing, he means that of the River Gardon, that
passeth by Nismes, where there is a famous Conduit.

But what he meaneth by the chief Nemans, I cannot find.


LIX.

    French.

    Au chef Anglois a Nismes trop sejour,
    Devers l’Espagne au secours Ænobarbe,
    Plusieurs mouront par Mars ouvert ce jour,
    Quand en Artois faillir estoile en Barbe.

    English.

    The chief English shall stay too long at Nismes,
    A red haird man shall go to the succours of Spain,
    Many shall die by open War that day,
    When in Artois the Star shall fail in the Beard.

ANNOT.

All the difficulty lyeth in the last Verse: for my part I believe he
meaneth by it a bearded Comet, such as the Latines call Cometa barbatus.


LX.

    French.

    Par teste rase viendra bien mal eslire,
    Plus que sa charge ne porte passera,
    Si grand fureur & rage fera dire,
    Qua feu & sang tout Sexe tranchera.

    English.

    By a shaven head shall be made an ill choice,
    That shall go beyond his commission,
    He shall proceed with so great fury and rage,
    That he shall put both Sexes to fire and Sword.

ANNOT.

By a shaven head must be understood a Priest of the Romish Religion;
because they all have their heads shaven.


LXI.

    French.

    L’Enfant du grand nestant a sa naissance,
    Subjugera les hauts Monts Apennins,
    Fera trembler tous ceux de la balance,
    Depuis Monts Feurs jusques a Mont Senis.

    English.

    The Child of the great man that was not at his birth,
    Shall subdue the high Apennine Mountains,
    Shall make all those under Libra to quake,
    From Mount Feurs, as far as Mount Senis.

ANNOT.

The Apennine Mountains, are those that divide Italy in two parts.

Those under the Sign of Libra are the people of France. Feurs is a
City in France, in the Province of Forrest. Mount Senis is a high
Mountain in Savoy.


LXII.

    French.

    Sur les Rochers sang on verra pleuvoir,
    Sol Orient, Saturne Occidental,
    Pres d’Orgon Guerre, a Rome grand mal voir,
    Nefs parfondrées, & prins le Tridental.

    English.

    It shall rain blood upon the Rocks,
    The Sun being in the East, and Saturn in the West,
    War shall be near Orgon, and great evil at Rome,
    Ships shall be cast away, and the Trident be taken.

ANNOT.

I could not find what he meaneth by Orgon. As by the Trident being
taken, I suppose he meaneth a Ship called Neptune, because Neptune
is always painted with a Trident.


LXIII.

    French.

    De vaine emprise l’honneur indue plainte,
    Galliots errants par Latins froid, faim vagues,
    Non loin du Tybre de sang la Terre teinte,
    Et sur humains seront diverses plagues.

    English.

    Honour bringeth a complaint against a vain undertaking,
    Galleys shall wander through the Latin Seas, cold, hunger, Waves,
    Not far from Tyber the Earth shall be died with blood,
    And upon Mankind shall be several plagues.

ANNOT.

Tyber is the River of Rome, the rest are several prodigies that shall
come to pass.


LXIV.

    French.

    Les assembles par repos du grand nombre,
    Par Terre & Mer conseil contremandé,
    Pres de l’Autonne, Genes, Nue, de lombre,
    Par Champs & Villes le Chef contrebandé.

    English.

    The gathered by the rest of the great numbers,
    By Land and Sea shall recall their Councel,
    Near Autonne, Genes, and Nue of the shadow,
    In Fields and Towns the Chief shall be one against another.

ANNOT.

This passeth my understanding.


LXV.

    French.

    Subit venu l’effrayeur sera grande,
    Des principaux de l’affaire cachés:
    Et Dame Embraise plus ne sera en veuë,
    Et peu a peu seront le grands fachés.

    English.

    One coming upon a suddain shall cause a great fear,
    To the Chief men that were hidden and concerned in the business,
    And the Lady Ambraise shall be seen no more,
    And by little and little the great one shall be angry.

ANNOT.

What he meaneth by the lady Ambraise, I cannot find, the rest is easie.


LXVI.

    French.

    Sous les antiques edifices Vestaux,
    Non esloignez d’Aqueduct ruiné,
    De Sol & Lune sont les luissans metaux,
    Ardente Lampe Trajan d’or buriné.

    English.

    Under the ancient edifices of the Vestals,
    Not far from an Aqueduct ruinated,
    Are the bright mettals of Sun and Moon,
    A burning Lamp of Trajan of ingraven gold.

ANNOT.

Monsieur Catel in his second Book of Languedoc Chap. V. saith, that
there was a famous Aqueduct, which the Romans builded from the River
Gar to the Town of Nismes, which at present is ruinated.

Secondly, Near the Town there was a famous Temple dedicated to Diana,
where there is a Spring of water so great, that it seemeth rather a Lake
then a Fountain.

Thirdly, I find that the Emperour Adrian caused a Temple to be built in
the honour of Plotina Trajan’s wife.

Fourthly, He relateth that Jean Poldo found in the Town of Aix a
Marble with this inscription: ~Plotina~ ~Trajanis~ uxor, summa honestate
& integritate fulgens, sterilitatis defectu sine prole fecit conjugem,
qui ejus opera ~Adrianum~ adoptatum in Imperio Successorem habuit, a
quo in beneficii memoriam Nemausi æde sacra maximo Sumptu, sublimique
structura, ac Hymnorum cantu decorata, post mortem donata est: That is
to say, Plotina, Trajans wife, famous for her honesty and integrity,
was barren and left no Children to her Husband, which she perceiving,
intreated the Emperour to adopt Adrian for his Son, and to make him
his Successor in the Empire, which being come to pass, the new Emperour
in acknowledgement of such a benefit, did build her a Temple of a
magnificent Structure, and caused it to be Consecrated with Musick after
her death.

Fifthly, The said Author saith, that this Marble was taken out of that
Temple, when the River of Gardon did so overflow, as we have said.

By all this we see, that there was a Temple of Vestals at Nismes,
Diana the Maid being their chief Patroness, which is made now a
Nunnery, called la Fontaine. There is also to be seen the Temple of
Plotina, Trajans wife, built by Adrian his Successor. And as it was
the manner of the Ancients to put some of those inextinguishable Lamps in
their Graves; it is very likely, there was one of them in this Temple,
and because it should be known whose Grave it was, he caused Trajans
name to be Engraven in the foot of the said Lamp.

Let us explain now the Stanza: Under the Ancient Vestal buildings of
the Temple of ~Diana~, not far from the ruined Aqueduct, which carrieth
the water from the River Gar to Nismes, shall be found shining
mettals of ~Sol~ and ~Luna~, that is, Meddals of gold and silver, with
a burning Lamp of gold, wherein the name of Trajan was Engraven.
Histories make mention of several burning Lamps in this manner, that have
been found still burning in the ground, and not consumed, though they
had been there above 500 years; certainly the Oil of it must have been
incombustible, and could be extracted out of nothing but gold, quia nil
dat quod non habet.


LXVII.

    French.

    Quand Chef Perouse n’osera sa Tunique,
    Sens au convert tout nud s’expolier:
    Seront prins sept faict Aristocratique,
    Le Pere & Fils morts par poine te au collier.

    English.

    When the Chief of Perouse shall not dare without a Tunick,
    To expose himself naked in the dark,
    Seven shall be taken for setting up Aristocracy,
    The Father and the Son shall die by pricks in the Collar.

ANNOT.

Perouse is a City in Italy; the rest is plain.


LXVIII.

    French.

    Dans le Danube & le Rhine viendra boire,
    Le grand Chameau, ne sen repentira:
    Trembler le Rhosne & plus fort ceux de Loire,
    Et pres des Alpes Coq le ruinera.

    English.

    In Danubius and the Rhine shall come to drink,
    The great Camel, and shall not repent;
    The Rhosne shall tremble, and more those of Loire,
    And near the Alpes the Cock shall ruine him.

ANNOT.

This foretelleth a great incursion of the Turks into Germany,
insomuch that they shall water their Camels in the Rivers of Danubius,
and of the Rhyne, to the great terrour of France, wherein those
Rivers of Rhosne and Loire are.

But the last Verse, saith the Cock; that is, the French, shall overcome
and ruine the Turks, near the Mountains of the Alpes.


LXIX.

    French.

    Plus ne sera le grand en saux sommeil,
    L’Inquietude viendra prendre repos,
    Dresser Phalange d’Or, Azur, & vermeil,
    Subjuguer Affrique & ronger jusqu’aux os.

    English.

    The great one shall be no more in a false sleep,
    The restlessness shall take rest,
    He shall raise an Army of Gold and Azure,
    He shall conquer Affrica and gnaw it to the bones.

ANNOT.

This is concerning some great Prince, who shall raise a powerful Army,
and conquer Affrica with it.


LXX.

    French.

    Les Regions subietes a la Balance,
    Feront trembler les Monts par grande Guerre,
    Captifs tout sexe, avec toute Bizance,
    Qu’on criera a l’Aube Terre a Terre.

    English.

    The Regions under the sign of Libra,
    Shall make the Mountains quake with great War,
    Slaves of all sexes, with all Bizance,
    So that in the dawning of the day, they shall cry to Land to Land.

ANNOT.

This foretelleth the destruction of Constantinople, anciently called
Byzantium, by those that live under the Sign of Libra, that is, the
Europeans, and chiefly the French.


LXXI.

    French.

    Par la fureur d’un qui attendra l’eau,
    Par la grand rage tout l’exercite esmeu,
    Charge des Nobles a dixsept Bateaux,
    Au long du Rhosne tard Messager venud.

    English.

    By the fury of one staying for the Water,
    By his great rage the whole Army shall be troubled,
    There shall be seventeen Boats full of Noblemen
    Along the Rhosne, the Messenger shall come too late.

ANNOT.

The words and sense are plain.


LXXII.

    French.

    Pour le plaisir d’Edict voluptueux,
    On meslera la poison dans la Loy,
    Venus sera en cours si vertueux,
    Qu’obfusquera du Soleil tout alloy.

    English.

    By the pleasure of a voluptuous proclamation,
    The poison shall be mixed in the Law,
    Venus shall be in so great request,
    That it shall darken all the allay of the Sun.

ANNOT.

By a Proclamation, favouring or promoting Licentiousness, poison shall
be mixed in the Law, and leachery so much countenanced, as it shall
obscurate the allay of the Sun, that is, piety so much commended in the
Gospel, to all those that will fight under Christs Banner.


LXXIII.

    French.

    Persecutée sera de dien l’Eglise,
    Et les Saints Temples seront expoliez,
    L’Enfant la mere mettra nud en chemise,
    Seront Arabes au Polous ralliez.

    English.

    The Church of God shall be persecuted,
    And the holy Temples shall be spoiled,
    The Child shall turn out his Mother in her Smock,
    Arrabians shall agree with the Polonians.

ANNOT.

The Author could not be mistaken in this Prophecie; for the Church of
God shall always be persecuted, the Apostle confirmeth it, when he
saith, that all those that will live piously in Christ, must suffer
persecution: As for the spoiling of Churches, and other barbarous
actions, it hath been seen so often in France, in the time of the Civil
Wars for Religion, that it needeth no confirmation.

The last Verse concerning a peace between the Turks and the
Polonians, was fulfilled in the year 1623. when Sigismundus King of
Poland, by his Embassador the Duke Šbarasky, and by the mediation
of the English Embassador, concluded a Peace with the great Turk
Mustapha, the Articles of which you may read at large in the Turkish
History.


LXXIV.

    French.

    De sang Trojen naistra cœur Germanique,
    Qui deviendra en si haute puissance,
    Hors chassera gent estrange Arabique,
    Tournant l’Eglise en pristine préeminence.

    English.

    Of Trojan blood shall be born a German heart,
    Who shall attain to so high a power,
    That he shall drive away the strange Arrabian Nation,
    Restoring the Church to her former splendor.

ANNOT.

It seemeth to signifie, that by Alliance made between a German
Emperour, and a Daughter of France, which derive their Pedigree from
the Trojans, a Prince shall be born of so stout and valiant a heart,
as shall drive away all the Turkish power out of Germany, and shall
restore the Church to her former splendor.


LXXV.

    French.

    Montera haut sur le bien plus a dextre,
    Demourra assis sur la pierre carrée,
    Vers le midy posé a la senestre,
    Baston tortu en main, bouche ferrée.

    English.

    He shall go up upon the good more on the right hand,
    He shall stay sitting upon the square stone,
    Towards the South; being set, on the left hand,
    A crooked stick in his hand, and his mouth shut.

ANNOT.

I do acknowledge my Ignorance in this.


LXXVI.

    French.

    En lieu libere tendra son Pavillon,
    Et ne voudra en Citez prendre place,
    Aix, Carpentras, Lisle, Volce, Mont Cavaillon,
    Par tous ces lieux abolira sa trace.

    English.

    He shall pitch his Tent in the open air,
    Refusing to lodge in the City,
    Aix, Carpentras, Lisle, Volce, Mont Cavaillon,
    In all those places, he shall abolish his trace.

ANNOT.

Aix, Carpentras, Lisle Volce, Mont Cavaillon, are Cities of
Provence.


LXXVII.

    French.

    Tous les degres d’honneur Ecclesiastique,
    Seront changez en Dial Quirinal,
    En Martial, quirinal, Flaminique,
    Puis un Roy de France le rendra Vulcanal.

    English.

    All the degrees of Ecclesiastical honour,
    Shall be changed into a Dial Quirinal,
    Into Martial, Quirinal, Flaminick;
    After that, a King of France shall make it Vulcanal.

ANNOT.

All what I can say upon this, is, that Dialis in Latine is a Priest of
Jupiter, and Quirinal is a Priest of Romulus, Martial Flamen is a
Priest of Mars, Vulcanal is a Priest of Vulcan, let the ingenious
Reader make of all these the best construction he can.


LXXVIII.

    French.

    Les deux unis ne tiendront longuement,
    Et dans treize ans au Barbare Satrape,
    Aux deux costez feront tel perdement,
    Qu’un benira la Barque & sa cappe.

    English.

    The two united shall not hold long,
    Within thirteen years to the Barbarian Satrape,
    They shall cause such loss on both sides,
    That one shall bless the Boat and its covering.

ANNOT.

The word Satrape is a Persian word, signifying one of the Grandees at
Court. By the last Verse is meant, one that shall save his life and make
his escape, by the means of a covered Boat or Barge.


LXXIX.

    French.

    La sacree Pompe viendra baisser les aisles,
    Par la venue de grand Legislateur,
    Humble haussera, vexera les rebelles,
    Naistra sur Terre aucun Æmulateur.

    English.

    The sacred Pomp shall bow down her wings,
    At the coming of the great Lawgiver,
    He shall raise the humble and vex the rebellious,
    No Emulator of his shall be born.

ANNOT.

This seemeth to have a relation to the birth of Christ, or Christmas-day.


LXXX.

    French.

    L’Ogmion grande Bizance approchera,
    Chassée sera la Barbarique ligue,
    Des deux Loix l’une unique lachera,
    Barbare & France en perpetuelle brigue.

    English.

    The Ogmion shall come near great Bizance,
    And shall expel the Barbarian League,
    Of the two Laws, the wicked one shall yeild,
    The Barbarian, and the French shall be in perpetual jar.

ANNOT.

By the word Ogmion, every where in his Book, the Author meaneth
the King of France, who according to his words shall come near
Constantinople, and shall break the Barbarian League, and of the two
Laws, that is, the Christian and the Mahometan, the Mahometan shall yield
to the other.


LXXXI.

    French.

    L’Oyseau Royal sur la Cité solaire,
    Sept mois devant fera nocturne augure:
    Mur d’Orient cherra Tonnerre esclaire,
    Sept jours aux Portes les ennemies a l’heure.

    English.

    The Royal Bird upon the solar City,
    Seven Months together shall make a nocturn augury,
    The Eastern Wall shall fall, the Lightning shall shine,
    Then the enemies shall be at the Gate for seven days.

ANNOT.

By the Royal Bird is meant an Eagle, which for seven days together shall
be observed upon some Eastern City, and shall be taken for a presage,
that the Eastern Wall of that City shall fall by Lightning, at which time
the enemies shall be at the Gate for seven days together.


LXXXII.

    French.

    Au conclud pache hors de la Forteresse,
    Ne sortira celuy en desespoir mis:
    Quand ceux d’Arbois, de Langres, contre Bresse,
    Auront mis Dolle bouscade d’ennemis.

    English.

    Upon the agreement made, out of the Fort,
    Shall not come he that was in despair,
    When those of Arbois, of Langres, against Bresse,
    Shall have put in Dolle an Ambuscado of foes.

ANNOT.

The sense is, that according to the Articles or agreement made between
the Besieger of a Fort, and the Governour of it, the said Governour by
despair will not come out, and this shall happen, when those of Arbois
and Langres, shall be against those of Bressia, and shall have put an
Ambuscado in the City of Dolle.


LXXXIII.

    French.

    Ceux qui auront entreprins subvertir,
    Nompareil Regne, puissant & invincible,
    Feront par fraude, nuicts trois advertir,
    Quand le plus grand a Table lira Bible.

    English.

    Those that shall have undertaken to subvert
    The Kingdom that hath no equal in power and victories,
    Shall cause by fraud, notice to be given for three nights together,
    When the greatest shall be reading a Bible at the Table.

ANNOT.

What place is meant by the unparalell’d Kingdom, the Author hath hid as
well from me as the Reader.


LXXXIV.

    French.

    Naistre du Gouphre & Cité immesurée,
    Nay de parens obscurs & tenebreux:
    Qui la puissance du grand Roy reverée,
    Voudra destruire par Rouen & Eureux.

    English.

    One shall be born out of the Gulf and the unmeasurable City,
    Born of Parents obscure and dark,
    Who by the means of Rouen and Eureux,
    Will go about to destroy the power of the great King.

ANNOT.

Without doubt by this Gulf and unmeasured City the Author means Paris,
by reason of its greatness, and the multitude of its Inhabitants.


LXXXV.

    French.

    Par les Sueves & lieux circonvoisins,
    Seront en guerre pour cause des nuées:
    Gammares, locustes & cousins,
    Du Leman fautes seront bien desnuées.

    English.

    Through Swedeland and the Neighbouring places,
    By reason of the Clouds shall fall to War,
    The Lobstars, Grass-hoppers and Gnats,
    The faults of Leman shall appear very naked.

ANNOT.

By Leman is meant the City of Geneva, the rest needeth no further
interpretation.


LXXXVI.

    French.

    Par les deux testes, & trois bras separez,
    La grand Cité sera par eaux vexée;
    Des Grands d’entre eux par esgarez,
    Par teste Perse Byzance fort pressée.

    English.

    Divided in two heads and parted into three arms,
    The great City shall be troubled with Waters,
    Some great ones among them scattered by banishment,
    By a Persian head Byzance shall be sore oppressed.

ANNOT.

This Prophecy containeth three things, the first is an Inundation by
which Paris is threatened, for without doubt he meaneth here that City,
at the head of which the River Seine is divided in two heads, and makes
an Island where the Cathedral Church and the Palace are situated, and
then parted into three branches, one of which runneth by the Church of
the Augustines, the other by the Quay of la Megisserie, and the
third passeth under the great Hospital; this City then is threatned here
of an Inundation, to which it is very subject, by reason of the lowness
of her situation, and the confluence of several Rivers that meet at the
head of it. The second part of the Prophecy hinteth that at that time,
some great ones of that City shall be banished; and the third, that
Constantinople, which was anciently called Byzantium; or rather the
great Turk by a figure of Rhetorick, called Synecdoche, shall be much
oppressed by the Persians.


LXXXVII.

    French.

    L’An que Saturne hors de servage,
    Au franc terroir sera d’eau inondé,
    De sang Troien sera son mariage,
    Et sera seur d’Espagnols circondé.

    English.

    In the year that Saturn out of slavery,
    In the free Countrey shall be drowned by water,
    With Troian blood his marriage shall be,
    And for certain he shall be hedged about with Spaniards.

ANNOT.

By Troian blood is understood the French Nation, the meaning
therefore is, that in the year that a great Inundation shall be in
France, then shall a notable marriage be made, by which the French
shall be hedged about, or fenced by Spaniards.


LXXXVIII.

    French.

    Sur le Sablon par un hideux Deluge,
    Des autres Mers trouvé Monstre Marin,
    Proche de lieu sera fait un refuge,
    Tenant Savone esclave de Turin.

    English.

    Upon the sand through an hideous Deluge
    Of other Seas, shall be found a Sea Monster,
    Near to that place shall be made a Sanctuary,
    Which shall make Savone a slave to Turin.

ANNOT.

When by the overflowing of the Neighbouring Seas, a Sea Monster shall be
cast upon the Sand, near to that Place shall be built a Fort, that shall
make Savona a slave to Turin.

Savona is a Town by the Sea side, belonging to the Genoese, Turin
is the chief City of Piemont, belonging to the Duke of Savoy.


LXXXIX.

    French.

    Dedans Hongrie par Boheme, Navarre,
    Et par Banieres feintes seditious,
    Par fleurs de Lis paix portant la barre,
    Contre Orleans fera esmotions.

    English.

    In Hungaria, through Bohemia and Navarre,
    And by banners fained seditions,
    Through flower de Luce the Countrey that wears the Bar,
    Against Orleans shall make commotions.

ANNOT.

This Stanza is divided into two parts; the two first Verses foretell the
troubles that were to happen in Hungaria, Bohemia, and Navarre
for Religion sake. The two last ones were fulfilled, when the Prince of
Condé, who in his Arms wears the flower de Luce with the Bar, did seize
upon Orleans for the Protestant party.


XC.

    French.

    Dans les Cyclades, en Corinthe, & Larisse,
    Dedans Sparte tout le Peloponese,
    Si grand famine peste far faux conisse,
    Neuf mois tiendra & tout le Cherronesse.

    English.

    In the Cyclades, in Corinthe, and Larisse,
    In Sparta, and all Peloponesus,
    There shall be so great a famine and plague by false arts,
    That shall last nine months in Chersonesus.

ANNOT.

Cyclades are the Islands in the Ægean Sea; Corinth, Larissa,
Sparta, Peloponesus, and Chersonesus, are Countreys of Grecia.


XCI.

    French.

    Au grand marché qu’on dit des mensongers,
    De tout Torrent & Champ Athenien,
    Seront surpris par les Chevaux legers,
    Des Albanois, Mars, Leo, Sat. au Versien.

    English.

    In the great Market called of the Liars,
    Which is all Torrent and Athenian Field,
    They shall be surprised by the light Horse,
    Of the Albanese, Mars in Leo, Saturn in Aquarius.

ANNOT.

When Mars shall be in the sign of Leo, and Saturn in that of
Aquarius, then the Countrey of Athens shall be over-run by light
Horsemen of Albania.


XCII.

    French.

    Apres le siege tenu dixsept ans
    Cinq changeront en tel revolu terme,
    Puis sera l’un esleu de mesme temps,
    Qui des Romains ne sera trop conforme.

    English.

    After the seat possessed seventeen years,
    Five shall change in such a space of time;
    After that, one shall be elected at the same time,
    Who shall not be very conformable to the Romans.

ANNOT.

The meaning is, that when a Pope shall have sat in the Chair, for the
space of 17 years, within the same space of 17 years, five others shall
be elected; and after them another, that shall not be well approved of by
the Roman Clergy, and Nobility. If my memory doth not fail me, this is
come to pass already; but wanting the Popes Chronology, I could not make
it good.


XCIII.

    French.

    Soubs le terroir du rond Globe Lunaire,
    Lors que sera dominateur Mercure,
    L’Isle d’Escosse fera un Lumenaire,
    Que les Anglois mettra a desconfiture.

    English.

    Under the Territory of the round Lunary Globe,
    When Mercury shall be Lord of the ascendant;
    The Island of Scotland shall make a Luminary,
    That shall put the English to an overthrow.

ANNOT.

This Prophecie must of necessity be past; for since the union of both
Kingdom under one King, such a thing hath not happened, nor is it likely
it should be hereafter.


XCIV.

    French.

    Translatera en la grand Germanie,
    Brabant & Flanders, Gand, Bruges & Bologne,
    La trefue fainte le grand Duc d’Armenie,
    Assailera Vienne & la Coloigne.

    English.

    He shall translate into the great Germany,
    Brabant, Flanders, Gand, Bruges, and Bullen,
    The truce fained, the great Duke of Armenia,
    Shall assault Vienna and Colen.

ANNOT.

It is concerning an Emperour that shall add all those Countreys to the
Empire of Germany.


XCV.

    French.

    Nautique rame invitera les umbres,
    Du grand Empire lors viendra conciter,
    La mer Ægee des lignes des Encombres,
    Empeschant londe Tirrhene de fletter.

    English.

    The Sea Oare shall invite the shades,
    Of the great Empire, then shall it come to stir,
    The Ægean Sea, with lines of Encumbers,
    Hindering the Tirrhene Sea to roll.

ANNOT.

This is either Mistical or Metaphorical, or I understand it not.


XCVI.

    French.

    Sur le milieu du grand monde la Rose,
    Pour nouveaux faits sang public espandu,
    A dire uray on aura bouche close,
    Lors au besoing viendra tard lattendu.

    English.

    The Rose shall be in the middle of the great world,
    Blood shall be publickly spilt for new deeds;
    To say the truth, every one shall stop his mouth,
    Then at the time of need shall come long looked for.

ANNOT.

The words are plain, out of which every one may make what construction he
pleaseth.


XCVII.

    French.

    Le na difforme par horreur suffoqué,
    Dans la Cité du grand Roy habitable,
    L’edit severy des captifs revoqué,
    Gresle & Tonnerre, Condon inestimable.

    English.

    The deformed born shall through horror be suffocated,
    In the habitable City of the great King,
    The severe Proclamation against banished shall be recalled,
    Hail and Thunder shall do inestimable harm at Condon.

ANNOT.

Condon is a Town in France; the rest is plain.


XCVIII.

    French.

    A quarante huit degré Climacterique,
    A fin de Cancer si grande secheresse,
    Poisson en Mer, Fleuve, Lac cuit hectique,
    Bearn, Bigorre, par feu Ciel en detresse.

    English.

    At the Climacterical degree of eight and fourty,
    At the end of Cancer, shall be such a drougth,
    That Fish in the Sea, River, and Lake shall be boiled to a consumption,
    Bearn and Bigorre by Heavenly fire shall be in distress.

ANNOT.

Bearn and Bigorre are two Provinces of France; the rest is plain.


XCIX.

    French.

    Milan, Ferrare, Turin & Aquilee,
    Capne, Brundis vexez par gent Celtique,
    Par le Lion & Phalange Aquilee,
    Quand Rome aura le chef vieux Britannique.

    English.

    Milan, Ferrara, Turin, and Aquileia,
    Capne, Brundis, shall be vexed by the French,
    By the Lion and troop of Aquileia,
    When Rome shall have an old Brittanick Head.

ANNOT.

The Cities here mentioned are all in Italy.


C.

    French.

    Le boutefeu par son feu attrapé,
    Du feu du Ciel a Tartas & Comminge,
    Foix, Aux, Mazere, haut vieillard escapé,
    Par ceux de Hess, de Saxe & de Turinge.

    English.

    The incendiary shall be overtaken by his own fire,
    Heavenly fire shall fall at Tartas and Cominge,
    Foix, Auch, Mazerre, a tall old man shall escape,
    By the means of those of Hessia, Saxony, and Turinge.

ANNOT.

Tartas, Cominge, Foix, Auch, Mazere are Towns in France.
Hessia, Saxony, and Turinge are Provinces of Germany.




THE PROPHECIES OF Michael Nostradamus.

CENTURY VI.


I.

    French.

    Autour des Monts Pyrenees grand amas,
    De gent estrange secourir Roy nouveau,
    Pres de Garonne du grand Temple du Mas,
    Un Romain Chef le craindra dedans l’Eau.

    English.

    About the Pyrenean Mountains there shall be a great gathering
    Of strange Nations to succour a new King;
    Near Garonne and the great Temple of Mas,
    A Roman Captain shall fear him in the Water.

ANNOT.

The Pyrenean Mountains are those that part Spain from France;
Garonne is the River that runneth at Bourdeaux, it seemeth then, that
upon that River a Roman Captain shall stand in much fear of the new
King before mentioned.


II.

    French.

    En la cinq cens octante plus & moins,
    On attendra le siecle bien estrange,
    En l’an sept cens & trois (cieux en tesmoins),
    Regnes plusieurs un a cinq feront change.

    English.

    In the year five hundred fourscore more or less,
    There shall be a strange Age,
    In the year seven hundred and three (witness Heaven),
    Many Kingdoms, one to five shall be changed.

ANNOT.

What strange age it was in the year 1580. every one may satisfie himself
by History. As for the year 1703. our Author saith there will be great
wonders, chiefly there shall many changes be in Kingdoms, insomuch, that
one shall be divided into five.


III.

    French.

    Fleuve qu’esproune le nouveau nay Celtique,
    Sera en grande de l’Empire discorde:
    Le jeune Prince par gent Ecclesiastique,
    Le Sceptre osté Corone de concorde.

    English.

    The River that makes tryal of the new born Celtick,
    Shall be at great variance with the Empire,
    The young Prince shall be an Ecclesiastical person,
    And have his Scepter taken off, and the Crown of concord.

ANNOT.

This River is the River of Rhyne, because the ancient French when
they had a King newly born, they used to put him upon a Target, to make
him swim upon that River, to try whether by his swimming he was lawfully
begotten or no; the meaning therefore is, that this new born Celtique
or French King shall be at variance with the Empire, and that in his
young years the Clergy shall take his Scepter and Crown from him.


IV.

    French.

    Fleuve Celtique changera de Rivage,
    Plus ne tiendra la Cité d’Agripine,
    Tout transmué horsmis le viel Language,
    Saturn, Leo, Mars, Cancer en rapine.

    English.

    The River of the Low-Countreys shall change her Shoare,
    It shall touch no more the City of Agrippina,
    All shall be transformed, except the old Language,
    Saturn, Leo, Mars, Cancer in Rapine.

ANNOT.

This is a strange prediction, if it should prove true, that the Rhine
should change its course, and should touch no more the City of Colen,
which is here called Agrippina; because its name in Latine is Colonia
Agrippina, being a Colony of the Romans, built by M. Agrippa, son
in Law to Augustus; others say by Agrippina, Mother to the Emperour
Nero.

The last Verse signifieth no more than an unfortunate position and Aspect
of the two Planets, Saturn and Mars, and of the two Signs, Leo and
Cancer.


V.

    French.

    Si grand famine par une pestifere,
    Par pluye longue le long du Pole Artique.
    Samarobryn cent lieux de l’Hemisphere,
    Vivront sans loy exempt de politique.

    English.

    So great a famine with a plague,
    Through a long Rain shall come along the Artick Pole,
    Samarobryn a hundred Leagues from the Hemisphere,
    Shall live without Law, exempt from pollicy.

ANNOT.

The two last Verses foretel a great Plague and Famine that shall come
from the North, by the means of the long Rain.

Samarobryn he calls a people, that shall be a hundred Leagues from our
Hemisphere, and shall live without Law and Policy.


VI.

    French.

    Apparoistra vers le septentrion,
    Non loing de Cancer l’estoille cheveluë,
    Suze, Sienne, Boëce, Eretrion,
    Mourra de Rome grand, la nuict disperuë.

    English.

    Towards the North shall appear,
    Not far from Cancer a blazing Star,
    Suza, Sienna, Boëce, Eretrion,
    There shall die at Rome a great man, the night being past.

ANNOT.

Here he foretelleth the apparition of a Commet that shall be vertical to
the Cities here named, and not far from the Sign of Cancer, at which
time a great person shall die at Rome, about the dawning of the day.


VII.

    French.

    Norvege & Dace, & l’Isle Britannique,
    Par les unes freres seront vexées,
    Le chef Romain issu du sang Gallique,
    Et les copies aux forests repousées.

    English.

    Norvegia, and Dacia, and the Brittish Island,
    Shall be vexed by the Brothers united.
    The Roman Captain issued from French blood,
    His Forces shall be beaten back to the Forrest.

ANNOT.

The difficulty lyes in the word Brothers, which I suppose to be the
United Provinces. The rest is plain.


VIII.

    French.

    Ceux qui estoient en regne pour scavoir,
    Au Royal change deviendront a pauvris,
    Uns exilez sans appuy, Or navoir,
    Lettréz & lettres ne seront a grand pris.

    English.

    Those that were in esteem for their learning,
    Upon the change of a King shall become poor,
    Some banished, without help, having no Gold,
    Learned and learning shall not be much valued.

ANNOT.

This Prophecie is clear enough, and here the Author hath said nothing,
but what doth commonly happen.


IX.

    French.

    Aux Temples Saints seront faits grands scandales,
    Comptez seront peur honneurs & louanges,
    D’un que l’on grave d’Argent, d’Or les Medals,
    La fin sera en tourmens bien estranges.

    English.

    To the holy Temples shall be done great scandals,
    That shall be accounted for honours and praises,
    By one, whose medals are graven in Gold and Silver,
    The end of it shall be in very strange torments.

ANNOT.

Here the Reader must understand that the Author was a Roman Catholick,
and therefore calleth Holy Temples, the Churches of the Romish
Religion, which in the beginning of the Civil Wars in France, were much
abased by those of the Protestant Religion, then called Huguenots,
whose chief was Henry King of Navarre, who was the only man amongst
the Protestant party, that could have Money and Medals coined to his
stamp, as being King of Navarre. But the last Verse of this Prophecie
proved too true, when upon St. Bartholomews day, the 24 of August, in
the year 1572. the general Massacre of the Protestants was made through
France.


X.

    French.

    Un peu du temps les Temples des Couleurs,
    De blanc & noir des deux entremislée,
    Rouges & jaunes leur embleront les leurs,
    Sang, terre, peste, faim, feu, eau affollée.

    English.

    Within a little while the Temples of the Colours,
    White and Black shall be intermixt,
    Red and Yellow shall take away their Colours,
    Blood, earth, plague, famine, fire, water shall destroy them.

ANNOT.

By the Temples of the Colours White and Black, I suppose he means that
of Peace, and of War; by the Red and Yellow, may be meant the Empire of
the Sweads, who shall be at variance together; and by their long War
shall bring the Plagues here mentioned, as it came to pass in the Wars
of Germany, between the Emperour and Gustavus Adolphus, King of the
Sweads.


XI.

    French.

    Les sept rameaux a trois seront reduits,
    Les plus aisnez seront surprins par morts,
    Fratricider les deux seront seduits,
    Les Conjures en dormant seront morts.

    English.

    The seven branches shall be reduced to three,
    The eldest shall be surprised by death,
    Two shall be said to kill their Brothers,
    The Conspirators shall be killed, being asleep.

ANNOT.

It is apparent, that he speaks of seven Brethren, that shall be reduced
to three, whereof the eldest son shall be surprised by death, and two of
the rest shall be said to have murdered their Brother, the Conspirators
shall afterwards be killed in their sleep.


XII.

    French.

    Dresser Copie pour monter a l’Empire,
    Du Vatican le sang Royal tiendra,
    Flamens, Anglois, Espagne aspire,
    Contre l’Italie & France contendra.

    English.

    To raise an Army, for to ascend unto the Empire,
    Of the Vatican, the Royal blood shall endeavour,
    Flemings, English, Spain shall aspire,
    And shall contend against Italy and France.

ANNOT.

This prediction signifies no more, but that there shall be a great
commotion among the Nations, of Europe, concerning the election of
a Pope, which is called here the Empire of the Vatican; because the
Vatican is the Popes Palace in Rome.


XIII.

    French.

    Un dubieux ne viendra loing du regne,
    La plus grand part le voudra soustenir,
    Un Capitole ne voudra point quil regne,
    Sa grande Chaire ne pourra maintenir.

    English.

    A doubtful man shall not come far from the Reign,
    The greatest part will uphold him,
    A Capitol will not consent that he should Reign,
    His great Chair he shall not be able to maintain.

ANNOT.

What should that doubtful man be, whom our Author doth mention here, is
not easie to be understood; but it seemeth that it shall be some body
pretending to the Popedom, who shall have a great party for himself, and
yet for all that shall be excluded, and not able to keep his Seat; so
that this Prophecie is but the second part of the foregoing; for they
have both a relation together. The Capitol anciently was the Citadel of
Rome, and now is the place where the Courts of Judicature meet, called
Campidoglio.


XIV.

    French.

    Loing de sa Terre Roy perdra la Bataille,
    Prompt, eschapé poursuivy, suivant pris,
    Ignare pris soubs la dorée maille,
    Soubs feint habit, & l’Ennemy surpris.

    English.

    Far from his Countrey the King shall loose a Battle,
    Nimble, escaped, followed, following, taken,
    Ignorantly taken under the gilded Coat of Mail,
    Under a feigned habit the enemy taken.

ANNOT.

This Prophecy was fulfilled in the year 1578. when Don Sebastian King
of Portugal, went into Affrica, to help and succour Muley Hamet,
against Muley Maluc, that had expelled him out of the Kingdom of Fez
and Morocco, and there fought that famous Battle of Alcasserquibir,
wherein his whole Army was routed, and himself slain by the Moores, and
his body afterwards sold to the King of Spain for a 100000. Crowns.


XV.

    French.

    Dessous la Tombe sera trouvé le Prince,
    Qu’aura le pris par dessus Nuremberg:
    L’Espagnol Roy en Capricorne mince,
    Feinct & trahy par le grand Vutitemberg.

    English.

    Under the Tomb shall be found the Prince,
    That shall have a price above Nuremberg,
    That Spanish King in Capricorn shall be thine,
    Deceived and betrayed by the great Vutitemberg.

ANNOT.

We hear of no Prince that had that advantage upon Nuremberg, but only
Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden, who took it. The last two Verses
signifie no more, then that the King of Spain shall be wasted at the
time when the Sun is in Capricorn.


XVI.

    French.

    Ce que ravy sera du jeune Milve,
    Par les Normans de France & Picardy,
    Les noirs du Temple du lieu de Negrisilve,
    Feront aux Berge & feu de Lombardie.

    English.

    That which shall be taken from the young Kite,
    By the Normans of France and Picardie,
    The black ones of the Temple of the place called black Forrest.
    Shall make a Rendezvouz, and a fire in Lombardie.

ANNOT.

The meaning is, that what the Normans and those of Picardie shall
save from the hand of a young conquering Prince, the same shall be
imployed in building a Temple in the black Forrest, which is that part of
the Forrest of Arden, that lies near Bohemia, and another part of it
to build a House in Lombardie.


XVII.

    French.

    Apres les livres bruslez les Asiniers,
    Contraints seront changer d’habits divers:
    Les Saturnins bruslez par les meusniers,
    Hors la pluspart qui ne sera convers.

    English.

    After the Books shall be burnt, the Asses,
    Shall be compelled several times to change their Cloaths,
    The Saturnins shall be burnt by the Millers,
    Except the greater part, that shall not be discovered.

ANNOT.

This seems to foretell a persecution of ignorant men against the learned,
after which shall happen a confusion amongst the ignorant persons, who
shall be forced to disguise themselves.

The last two Verses seem to be of the same sense, for by the Saturnins
I understand studious people, and by the Millers rude and unlearned
persons.


XVIII.

    French.

    Par les Physiques le grand Roy delaissé,
    Par sort non art de l’Ebrieu est en vie,
    Luy & son Genre au Regne hault pousé,
    Grace donnée a gent qui Christ envie.

    English.

    The great King being forsaken by Physicians,
    Shall be kept alive by the Magick and not by the art of a Jew,
    He, and his kindred shall be set at the top of the Kingdom,
    Grace shall be given to a Nation that envieth Christ.

ANNOT.

This in plain words signifieth no more, but that a King shall be
desparately sick and forsaken by his Physicians, and shall recover
by the help of a Jew, for which fact those of that Nation shall be
reestablished in his Countrey.


XIX.

    French.

    La vraye flamme engloutira la Dame,
    Que voudra mettre les Innocens a feu,
    Pres de l’aussaut l’exercite s’enflamme,
    Quand dans Seville monstre en Bœuf sera veu.

    English.

    The true flame shall swallow up the Lady,
    That went about to burn the guiltless,
    Before the Assault the Army shall be incouraged,
    When in Seville, a Monster like an Ox shall be seen.

ANNOT.

Seville is the chiefest City of Andalusia a Province in Spain; the
rest is plain.


XXI.

    French.

    L’Union feinte sera peu de durée,
    Les uns changes reformez la plus part:
    Dans les Vaisseaux sera gent endurée,
    Lors aura Rome un nouveau Leopart.

    English.

    The feigned union shall not last long,
    Some shall be changed, others for the most part reformed,
    In the Ships people shall be pen’d up,
    Then shall Rome have a new Leopard.

ANNOT.

When the things contained in the three first Verses shall come to pass,
then Rome shall have a new Pope, expressed here by the word Leopard
from the variousness, that is, in his Pontifical Garments.


XXI.

    French.

    Quand ceux du Pole Artique unis ensemble,
    En Orient grand effrayeur & crainte,
    Esleu nouveau soustenu le grand tremble,
    Rodes, Bisance de sang Barbare taincte.

    English.

    When those of the Artick Pole shall be united together,
    There shall be in the East a great fear and trembling,
    One shall be newly Elected, that shall bear the brunt,
    Rodes, Bisance, shall be dy’d with Barbarian blood.

ANNOT.

This foretelleth an union between the Europeans, or Nations of the
North against the Eastern people, or Turks, and that the Christians shall
make choice of such a General, that shall make the East quake, and get
such Victories, whereby Rhodes and Constantinople shall be dyed with
Turkish blood.


XXII.

    French.

    Dedans la Terre du grand Temple Celique,
    Neveu a Londres par paix feinte meurtry,
    La Barque alors deviendra Schismatique,
    Liberté feinte sera au corne & cry.

    English.

    Within the ground of the great Cœlestial Temple,
    A Nephew at London by a fained peace shall be murdered,
    The Boat at that time shall become Schismatical,
    A fained liberty shall be with Hue and Cry.

ANNOT.

I think that by the great Cœlestial Temple, he meaneth that of St.
Paul, in which, or in the ground about it, shall be murdered a Nephew
by his Uncle, which shall cause great divisions and dissensions in the
City, compared here to a Boat, and that a dissembled or fained liberty
shall be proclaimed.


XXIII.

    French.

    Despit de Roy, numismes descriez,
    Peuples seront esmeus contre leur Roy,
    Paix fait nouveau, Saintes Loix empirées,
    Rapis onc fut en si piteux arroy.

    English.

    The despight of a King, and Coin being brought lower
    People shall rise against their King,
    Peace newly made, Holy Laws being made worse,
    Rapis was never in such a great disorder.

ANNOT.

The first thing here to be observed, is the word Rapis, which is the
Anagramme of Paris, which he saith was never in such a trouble
before, as it shall be when the people shall rebel against the King for
hatred, and because he shall have put low the price and intrinsical value
of Coin and Money; he foretelleth also that there shall be a new Peace
made, and that the Holy Laws shall be much impaired.


XXIV.

    French.

    Mars & le Sceptre se trouvera conjoint,
    Dessoubs Cancer calamiteuse guerre,
    Un peu apres sera nouveau Roy oingt.
    Qui par long temps pacifiera la Terre.

    English.

    Mars and the Scepter, being conjoyned together,
    Under Cancer shall be a calamitous War,
    A little while after a new King shall be anointed,
    Who for a long time shall pacifie the Earth.

ANNOT.

The meaning of this is, that when the Planet of Mars shall be in
conjunction with the constellation he calleth here the Scepter, that
then shall be a very calamitous War. The two last Verses are plain enough
of themselves.


XXV.

    French.

    Par Mars contraire sera la Monarchie,
    Du grand Pescheur en trouble ruineux,
    Jeune, noir, rouge prendra la Hierarchie,
    Les proditeurs iront jour bruineux.

    English.

    By Mars contrary shall the Monarchy
    Of the great Fisherman, be brought into ruinous trouble,
    A young, black, red shall possess himself of the Hierarchy,
    The Traitors shall undertake it on a misty day.

ANNOT.

This Prophecie is concerning a certain Pope, signified here by the word
of great Fisherman; because in his Seal is graven a Fisherman, and
therefore in all his Bulls and Expeditions, it is always written, Datum
Romæ sub sigillo piscatoris: this Pope then it seemeth, shall be brought
to ruine, and another it seemeth shall succeed him, having here three
Epithetes, viz. Young, Black, and Red, which signifieth, that
against the common election of Popes, he shall be elected young, and
shall be Black in his complexion, and Red in Cloaths, viz. a Cardinal.
Hierarchy is a Greek word, signifying Dominion over the Church. The
last Verse needeth no explication, being plain enough of it self.


XXVI.

    French.

    Quattre ans le siege quelque peu bien tiendra,
    Un surviendra libidineux de vie,
    Ravenna, & Pise, Verone soustiendront,
    Pour eslever la Croix de Pape envie.

    English.

    Four years he shall keep the Papal seat pretty well,
    Then shall succeed one of a libidinous life,
    Ravenna, Pisa, shall take Verona’s part,
    To raise up the Popes Cross to Life.

ANNOT.

This Prediction seemeth to have not only a relation to the foregoing,
but also a connexion; for the Author still handleth the matter of the
Popedome, and saith, that after that Pope shall have Reigned four years,
there shall succeed one that shall be notorious for debauchedness and
lechery, and that those Towns he mentioneth here (which are all in
Italy) shall take the Popes part.


XXVII.

    French.

    Dedans les Isles de cinq fleuves a un,
    Par le croissant du grand Chyren Selin,
    Par les bruynes de l’air fureur de l’un,
    Six eschapez, chachez fardeaux de lin.

    English.

    In the Islands from five Rivers to one,
    By the increase of great Chyren Selin,
    By the Frost of the Air one shall under furious,
    Six shall escape, hidden within bundles of Flax.

ANNOT.

Chyren by transposition is taken for Henry, and Selin for a King
called so; because it is the name of a Turkish Emperour: So that by
this Stanza I suppose he means Henry II. his Master, King of France.
The rest is plain.


XXVIII.

    French.

    Le grand Celtique entrera dedans Rome,
    Menant amas d’exilez & bannis,
    Le grand Pasteur mettra a mort tout homme,
    Qui pour le Coq estoient aux Alpes unis.

    English.

    The great Celtique shall enter into Rome,
    Leading with him a great number of banished men,
    The great Shepheard shall put to death every man,
    That was united for the Cock near the Alpes.

ANNOT.

Because this word Celtique is often repeated in this Book, it would not
be amiss to satisfie the Reader of the meaning of it; it is properly the
Nation of the Flemings, and some others of the Low-Countreys as far as
the Mase and the Rhyne, which anciently were called Galli Celtæ. By
the great Shepheard, is meant the Pope, and by the Cock is meant the
French Nation. The rest is easie.


XXIX.

    French.

    La Veufve Sainte entendant les nouvelles,
    De ses rameaux mis en perplex & trouble,
    Qui sera duit appaiser les querelles,
    Par son pourchas des Razes sera comble.

    English.

    The holy Widow hearing the News
    Of her Branches put in perplexity or trouble,
    That shall be skilfull in appeasing of quarrels,
    By his purchase shall make a heap of shaven heads.

ANNOT.

By the holy Widow, is meant the City of Rome, which is called in
Italian, Roma la santa, because of the blood of so many Martyrs that
hath been shed there, for the maintenance of the Christian Religion,
he calleth it a Widow; because at that time there will be no Pope
elected, and there shall be a kind of interregnum, as it always happens
when a Pope is dead, until the new one be elected. What he calleth here
Branches, are the Clergy men, and the shaven heads the Priests.


XXX.

    French.

    Par l’apparence de feinte Saincteté,
    Sera trahy aux ennemis le siege,
    Nuit qu’on croioid dormir en seureté,
    Pres de Brabant marcheront ceux de Liege.

    English.

    By the appearance of a feigned holiness,
    The siege shall be betrayed to the enemies,
    In a night that every one thought to be secure,
    Near Brabant shall march those of Liege.

ANNOT.

Brabant is one of the seventeen Provinces, and Liege is a great City
upon the River of Maze. The rest is not difficult.


XXXI.

    French.

    Roy trouvera ce quil desiroit tant,
    Quand le Prelat sera repris a tort,
    Response au Duc le rendra mal content,
    Qui dans Milan mettra plusieurs a mort.

    English.

    A King shall find what he so much longed for,
    When a Prelate shall be censured wrongfully,
    An answer to the Duke will make him discontented,
    Who in Milan shall put many to death.

ANNOT.

This Prophecie is too indefinite, to admit of a particular sense; for
there be so many Prelates, so many Kings, so many Dukes, that it is not
easie to fix upon any particular one, and therefore we must leave this
Stanza in Democritus’s Well.


XXXII.

    French.

    Par trahison de verges a mort battu,
    Puis surmonté sera par son desordre,
    Conseil frivole au grand captif sentu,
    Nez par fureur quand Berich viendra mordre.

    English.

    By Treason one shall be beaten with rods to death,
    Then the Traitor shall be overcome by his disorder,
    The great Prisoner shall try a frivilous Counsel,
    When Berich shall bite anothers nose through anger.

ANNOT.

The words are so plain, that every one may make his own interpretation of
them.


XXXIII.

    French.

    Sa main derniere par Alus sanguinaire,
    Ne le pourra par la Mer garentir,
    Entre deux fleuves craindra main militaire,
    Le noir l’Ireux le fera repentir.

    English.

    His last hand bloody through Alus,
    Shall not save him by Sea,
    Between two Rivers he shall fear the military hand,
    The black and Cholerick one shall make him repent.

ANNOT.

This seemeth to be concerning a bloody man, that had killed one Alus,
and sought to save himself by Sea; but was taken between two Rivers, and
put to death by the command of one that was a black and Cholerick man.


XXXIV.

    French.

    De feu volant la machination,
    Viendra troubler le Chef des Assiegez,
    Dedans sera telle sedition,
    Qu’en desespoir seront les profligez.

    English.

    The device of flying fire
    Shall trouble so much the Captain of the Besieged,
    And within shall be such mutiny,
    That the Besieged shall be in despair.

ANNOT.

It is a Fort or Town besieged by an Enemy, who shall torment the besieged
so much with Bombs and Granadoes, and other flying fire, that they shall
despair to escape.


XXXV.

    French.

    Pres de Rion & proche Blanchelaine,
    Aries, Taurus, Cancer, Leo, La Vierge,
    Mars, Jupiter, le Sol ardra grand plaine,
    Bois & Citez, Lettres cachez au Cierge.

    English.

    Near Rion going to Blanchelaine,
    Aries, Taurus, Cancer, Leo, Virgo,
    Mars, Jupiter, Sol shall burn a great Plain,
    Woods and Cities, Letters hidden in a wax Candle.

ANNOT.

The meaning of it is, that when by the virtues and meetings of the said
Constellations, a great plain shall be burnt by Rion (which is a City
in Auvergne) that then Letters shall be found hidden in a wax Candle.


XXXVI.

    French.

    Ne bien ne mal par bataille terrestre,
    Ne parviendra au confins de perouse,
    Rebeller pise, Florence voir mal estre,
    Roy nuit blessé sur mulet a noire house.

    English.

    Neither good nor evil by a Land-fight,
    Shall reach to the Borders of Perusa,
    Pisa shall rebel, Florence shall be in an ill case,
    A King being upon his Mule shall be wounded in the night time.

ANNOT.

Perusa, Pisa, and Florence are Cities in Italy; the rest is plain.


XXXVII.

    French.

    L’œuvre ancienne se parachevera,
    Du toit cherra sur le grand mal ruine,
    Innocent fait, mort on accusera,
    Nocent caché taillis a bruine.

    English.

    The ancient work shall be finished,
    From the tiling shall fall upon the great one an evil ruine,
    The innocent declared to be so, shall be accused after his death,
    The guilty shall be hidden in a wood in a misty weather.

ANNOT.

By the first Verse is understood an ancient building, which shall be
finished and brought to perfection, I suppose it to be the Louvere,
which hath been a building in the Reign of seven Kings. But before it be
throughly finished, some ruine shall fall upon a great man and kill him;
one declared innocent of the fact shall be accused of it after his death,
and he that shall be guilty of it shall escape by hiding himself in a
Wood in misty weather.


XXXVIII.

    French.

    Aux profligez de Paix les ennemis,
    Apres avoir l’Italie superée,
    Noir sanguinaire, rouge sera commis,
    Feu, sang verser, eau de sang colorée.

    English.

    To the vanquished the enemies of peace,
    After they shall have overcome Italy,
    A bloody black one shall be committed,
    Fire and blood shall be powerd, and water coloured with blood.

ANNOT.

A bloody black man shall be put into the hands of the vanquished, by
those that were enemies to peace, after they have conquered Italy,
whence shall proceed fire and blood, and water coloured with blood.


XXXIX.

    French.

    L’Enfant du Regne par Paternelle prinse,
    Expolier sera pour delivrer,
    Aupres du Lac Trasym en la Tour prinse,
    La troupe hostage pour trop fort s’enyvrer.

    English.

    The Child of the Kingdom, through his Fathers imprisonement,
    Shall be deprived of his Kingdom for the delivering of his father,
    Near the Lake Trasymene shall be taken in a Tower,
    The troop that was in Hostage, being drunk.

ANNOT.

The Lake Trasymene in Italy, is that near which Annibal got that
famous Battle upon the Romans. The rest is as plain as the words can
bear.


XL.

    French.

    Grand de Mogonce pour grande soif esteindre,
    Sera privé de sa grand dignité,
    Ceux de Cologne si fort le viendront plaindre,
    Que le grand Groppe au Rhin sera jetté.

    English.

    The great one of Ments for to quench a great thirst,
    Shall be deprived of his high dignity,
    Those of Colen shall bemoan him so much.
    That the great Groppe shall be thrown into the Rhine.

ANNOT.

This foretelleth the fall of an Archbishop of Ments, in Latine
Moguntia, who is the first Ecclesiastical Elector, and shall be
deprived of his dignity by a covetous and powerful Prince to satisfie
his covetousness, at which those of Colen his neighbours shall be so
incensed, that they shall throw that covetous person into the Rhine.


XLI.

    French.

    Les second Chef du Regne Dannemark,
    Par ceux de Frize & l’Isle Britannique,
    Fera despendre plus de cent mille mark,
    Vain exploiter voiage en Italique.

    English.

    The second head of the Kingdom of Dannemark,
    By those of Friezeland, and the Brittish Island,
    Shall cause to be spent above 100000. Mark,
    Vainly endeavouring a journey into Italy.

ANNOT.

This signifieth onely a conjunction of the Dutch, Danish, and
English Forces, to attempt something in Italy, which shall prove
fruitless, and cost a great deal of Money.


XLII.

    French.

    A l’Ogmion sera laissé le Regne,
    Du grand Selin, qui plus fera de fait,
    Par l’Italie estendra son enseigne,
    Regira par prudent contrefait.

    English.

    Unto l’Ogmion shall be left the Kingdom,
    Of great Selyn, who shall do more then the rest,
    Through Italy he shall spread his Ensigns,
    He shall govern by a prudent dissimulation.

ANNOT.

We have said before, that when ever the Author speaks of Ognion, he
meaneth the King of France, the meaning therefore of this whole Stanza
is, that Henry the II. Son to Francis the I. whom he calls here great
Selin, shall do more in Italy then his Predecessors had done, which
proved true, and he governed his Kingdom with a prudent dissimulation.


XLIII.

    French.

    Long temps sera sans estre habitée,
    Ou Siene & Marne autour vient arrouser,
    De la Thamise & Martiaux tentée,
    Deceus les gardes en evidant repousser.

    English.

    A great while shall be unhabited,
    Where Seine, and Marne comes to water about,
    Being attempted by the Thames and Martial people,
    The Guards deceived in thinking to resist.

ANNOT.

By the two first Verses, he meaneth without doubt the City of Paris,
for it is watered by those two Rivers the Seine and Marne, that joyn
together at the head of it, but how this City should become unhabited is
the great question, and chiefly by the means here alledged, viz. of
the English signified by the Thames, and other Martial people, the
Guards deceived in thinking to repulse the enemy.


XLIV.

    French.

    De nuict par Nantes l’Iris apparoistra,
    Des Arcs Marins susciteront la pluye:
    Arabique Goulfre grand classe parfondra,
    Un Monstre en Saxe naistre d’Ours & Truye.

    English.

    By night in Nantes the Rain-bow shall appear,
    Sea Rain-bows shall cause Rain;
    The Arabian Gulf shall drownd a great Fleet,
    A Monster shall be in Saxony from a Bear and a Sow.

ANNOT.

Nantes is a City in France, Iris is the Rainbow, Saxony is a
Province in Germany; the rest is plain.


XLV.

    French.

    Le Governeur du Regne bien scavent,
    Ne consentir voulant au faict Royal:
    Medite classe par le contraire vent,
    Le remettra a son plus desloyal.

    English.

    The Governour of the Kingdom being learned,
    Shall not consent to the Kings will:
    He shall intend to set out a Fleet by a contrary Wind,
    Which he shall put into the hands of the most disloyal.

ANNOT.

This signifies that the Governour or Vice-Roy of a Kingdom shall refuse
to consent to his Kings Deeds; the rest needeth no interpretation.


XLVI.

    French.

    Unjuste sera en exil Anvoyé,
    Par pestilance aux confins de non seggle,
    Response au rouge le fera desvoye,
    Roy retirant a la Rane & a l’Aigle.

    English.

    A just person shall be banished,
    By plague to the Borders of Non seggle,
    The answer to the red one shall make him deviate,
    Retiring himself to the Frog and the Eagle.

ANNOT.

I cannot find what he meaneth by Non-seggle; by the Eagle he meaneth
the Emperour, and by the Frog the King of France, for before he took
the Flower de Luce, the French bore three Frogs.


XLVII.

    French.

    Entre deux Monts les deux grands Assemblez,
    De laisseront leur simulte secrete,
    Bruxelle & Dolle par Langres accablez,
    Pour a Maline executer leur peste.

    English.

    Between two Mountains the two great ones shall meet,
    They shall forsake their secret enmity,
    Brusselle and Dolle shall be crushed by Langres,
    To put their plague in Execution at Maline.

ANNOT.

Brussel is a Town of Brabant, and so is Maline; Dolle is one of
Burgundy; and Langres another of France.


XLVIII.

    French.

    La saincteté trop faincte & seductive,
    Accompagne d’une langue diserte,
    La Cité vieille, & Parme trop nastive,
    Florence & Sienne rendront plus desertes.

    English.

    The fained and seducing holiness,
    Accompanied with a fluent tongue,
    Shall cause the old City, and too hasty Parma,
    Florence and Sienna to be more desert.

ANNOT.

I know not what he means by the old City, unless it be Rome, by reason
of its antiquity.


XLIX.

    French.

    De la partie de Mammer grand Pontife,
    Subjuguera les confins du Danube,
    Chasser les croix, par fer raffe ne riffe,
    Captifs, Or, bagues, plus de cent mille Rubles.

    English.

    From the party of Mammer high Priest,
    They shall subdue the borders of Danubius,
    They shall expel crosses, by Sword topse-turvy,
    Slaves, Gold, Jewels, more than 100000. Rubles.

ANNOT.

Some parties of the Popes side, shall subdue those bordering upon
Danubius, and drive away the Priests, turn all things topse-turvy, make
slaves, and take a booty above the value of 100000. Rubles. A Ruble is a
piece of Gold of the great Mogul, worth two or three pound sterling.


L.

    French.

    Dedans le puis seront trouvez les os,
    Se l’inceste commis par la Marastre,
    L’estat changé, en fera bruit des os,
    Et aura Mars ascendant pour son astre.

    English.

    In the Well shall be found the bones,
    Incest shall be committed by the Stepmother,
    The case being altered, there shall be great stir about the bones,
    And she shall have Mars for her ascending Planet.

ANNOT.

It is the strange wickedness of a woman, that shall incestuously be got
with Child by her Son in Law, and when she is delivered, shall kill her
Child, and throw him into a Well; a while after the water beginning to
corrupt, a search shall be made of the cause, and then the Childs Bones
shall be found, which shall cause a great stir, and for to know this
wicked woman, he saith, that the Planet of Mars shall be the ascendant
in her Horoscope.


LI.

    French.

    Peuple assemble voir nouveau spectacle,
    Princes & Roys par plusieurs assistans,
    Piliers faillir, murs, mais comme miracle,
    Le Roy fauve & trente des instans.

    English.

    People assembled to see a new show,
    Princes and Kings, with many assistants,
    Pillars shall fail, walls also, but as a miracle,
    The King saved, and thirty of the standers by.

ANNOT.

The words of this prediction are plain and easie, and signifie no more
than what often happeneth, and may happen yet, viz. that where a
concourse of people shall be to see a new show, the Pillars and walls of
the Building shall fall, and people perish by the ruine, (as if it were
by a Miracle) the King and thirty of the spectators shall be preserved.


LII.

    French.

    En lieu du grand qui sera condamné,
    De prison hors, son amy en sa place,
    L’espoir Troyen en six mois joinct, mort né,
    Le Sol a l’Vurne seront prins fleuves en glace.

    English.

    Instead of the great one that shall be condemned
    And put out of Prison, his friend being in his place,
    The Trojan hope in six months joyn, still born,
    The Sun in Aquarius, then Rivers shall be frozen.

ANNOT.

By the Trojan hope, is meant a King of France, who after he hath been
marryed six Months, shall have a Child still born.


LIII.

    French.

    Le grand Prelat Celtique a Roy suspect,
    De nuict par cours sortira hors du Regne,
    Par Duc fertile a son grand Roy Bretagne,
    Bisance a Cypres, & Tunis insuspect.

    English.

    The great Celtique Prelate suspected by his King,
    Shall in hast by night go out of the Kingdom
    By the means of a Duke the fruitful Britanie,
    Bisance by Cyprus, and Tunis shall be unsuspected.

ANNOT.

The great Celtique Prelate, was the Cardinal of Lorrain, Brother to
the Duke of Guizse, who being suspected by the King, went away by night
to Rome.

By fruitfull Brittain, is understood the province of that name in
France, which by the means of the Duke of Mercure, her Governour
shall be unsuspected by the King.


LIV.

    French.

    Au point du jours au second chant du Coq,
    Ceux de Tunes, de Fez, & de Bugie,
    Par les Arabes captif le Roy Maroq,
    L’an mil six cens & sept, de Liturgie.

    English.

    At the break of day, at the second crowing of the Cock,
    Those of Tunis, and Fez, and Bugia,
    By means of the Arabians, shall take Prisoner the King of Morocco,
    In the year 1607. by Liturgie.

ANNOT.

By Liturgie, I suppose he meaneth under pretext of Religion. The rest
is easie to be understood.


LV.

    French.

    Au Chelme Duc, en arrachant l’esponce,
    Voile Arabesque voir, subit descouverte:
    Tripolis, Chio, & ceux de Trapesonce,
    Duc prins, Marnegro, & la Cité deserte.

    English.

    The Chelme Duke, in pulling a spunge,
    Shall see Arabian Sails suddenly discovered:
    Tripolis, Chios, and those of Trapesan,
    The Duke shall be taken, Marnegro and the City shall be desert.

ANNOT.

Chelme is a German word, that signifies a Rogue. By Marnegro, is
meant the Black Sea, or Nigropont. By pulling a Spunge, I suppose the
great quantity of Spunges that stick to the Rocks in that Sea.

Tripolis, Chios, and Trapezon, are places in the Turkish
Dominions.


LVI.

    French.

    La crainte Armée de l’ennemy Narbon,
    Effroyera si fort les Hesperiques,
    Parpignan vuide par l’aveugle d’Arbon,
    Lors Barcelon par Mer donra les piques.

    English.

    The feared Army of the enemy Narbon,
    Shall so much terrifie the Spaniards,
    That Parpignan shall be left empty by the blind d’Arbon,
    Then Barcelon by Sea shall give the Chase.

ANNOT.

A great Army gathered about Narbon, shall so much terrifie the
Spaniards, that Parpignan a Town of theirs shall be desolate,
and left empty by the Governour, here called the blind d’Arbon,
then Barcelon, which is a Sea-Town in Catalonio, belonging to the
Spaniards shall come to its succours, and chase the enemy by Sea.


LVII.

    French.

    Celuy qu’estoit bien avant dans le Regne,
    Ayant Chef rouge proche a la Hierarchie,
    Aspre & cruel, & se fera tant craindre,
    Succedera a sacrée Monarchie.

    English.

    He that was a great way in the Kingdom,
    Having a red head and near the Hierarchy,
    Harsh and cruel, shall make himself so dreadful,
    That he shall succeed to the Sacred Monarchy.

ANNOT.

This is a person of great quality, and near of blood to a King, who
being a Cardinal, cruel and dreadful, shall be Elected Pope, I suppose
Clement the VII.


LVIII.

    French.

    Entre les deux Monarques esloignez,
    Lors que le Sol par Selin clair perdue:
    Simulté grande entre deux indignez,
    Qu’aux Isles & Sienne la liberté renduë.

    English.

    Between the two Monarchs that live far one from the other,
    When the Sun shall be Ecclipsed by Selene,
    Great enmity shall be between them two,
    So that liberty shall be restored to the Isles and Sienne.

ANNOT.

Here is nothing difficult but the word Selene, which is the Moon from
the Greek σεληνη.

The meaning is, that at such a time when the Sun is Ecclipsed by the
Moon, Sienna and the Islands about it shall be at liberty.


LIX.

    French.

    Dame en fureur par rage d’adultere,
    Viendra a son Prince conjurer non dire,
    Mais bref cogneu sera le vitupere,
    Que seront mis dixsept a Martyre.

    English.

    A Lady in fury by rage of an Adultery,
    Shall come to her Prince and conjure him to say nothing,
    But shortly shall the shameful thing be known,
    So that seventeen shall be put to death.

ANNOT.

The sense of this Stanza and the words are plain.


LX.

    French.

    Le Prince hors de son Terroir Celtique,
    Sera trahy, deceu par interprete,
    Rouen, Rochelle, par ceux de l’Armorique,
    Au Port de Blavet deceux par Moin & Prestre.

    English.

    That Prince being out of his Celtick Countrey,
    Shall be betrayed and deceived by an Interpreter,
    Rouen, Rochel, by those of Gascony,
    At the Port of Blavet shall be deceived by Monk and Priest.

ANNOT.

We have said many times before, what is meant by the word Celtique. The
Port of Blavet is that of the River of Bordeaux.


LXI.

    French.

    Le grand Tapis plié ne monstrera,
    Fors qu’a demy la pluspart de l’Histoire,
    Chassé du Regne aspre loin paroistra,
    Au fait Bellique chacun le viendra croire.

    English.

    The great Carpet folded shall not shew,
    But by half the greatest part of the History,
    The driven out of the Kingdom shall appear sharp afar off,
    In Warlike matters every one shall believe him.

ANNOT.

This needeth no interpretation.


LXII.

    French.

    Trop tard tous deux les fleurs seront perdües,
    Contre lay loy Serpent ne voudra faire,
    Des ligueurs forces par gallops confondues,
    Savone, Albingue, par Monech grand martyre.

    English.

    Both the flowers shall be lost too late,
    Against the Law the Serpent will do nothing,
    The forces of the Leaguers by gallops shall be confounded,
    Savone, Albingue, by Monech shall suffer great pain.

ANNOT.

The two first verses are too mistical for me; the third signifieth, that
by gallops; that is, by Troops of Horses, the Leaguers, viz. those that
held the party of the League, shall be routed by the Kings Cavalry. The
fourth, that Savone and Albingue, two Towns of the Genoeses, shall
be put to much trouble by those of Monech and Monaco, another Town
near them, belonging to the Prince of Monaco, a Genoese of the house
of Grimald.


LXIII.

    French.

    La Dame seule au Regne demurée,
    L’unique esteint premier au lict d’honneur,
    Sept ans sera de douleur epleurée,
    Puis longue vie au regne par bonheur.

    English.

    The Lady shall be left to reign alone,
    The only one being extinguished, first in the Bed of Honour,
    Seven years she shall weep for grief,
    After that she shall live long in the Reign by good luck.

ANNOT.

The second and fourth Verses perswade me, that this Stanza came to pass
in the time of Catharine of Medicis, wife to Henry II. because she
lived long, and the King died in the bed of Honour, and thus he saith,
that she was left to Reign alone; because her four Sons were all little
ones, so that she alone was Regent in France.

The second Verse saith, The holy one being extinguished, first, in the
Bed of Honour.

By this word the only one, the Author meaneth not the only Son, but the
only one living, such as Henry II. was to her, who was extinguished in
the Bed of Honour, and died of the wound he received at Tilting.

The third Verse saith, that after his death, her mourning lasted seven
years, that is, from the first of August 1559. to the first of August
1566. because that all those 16 Months that Francis II. she had
nothing but continual sorrow, by the conspiracy of Amboise, the secret
practises of the King of Navarre, and Prince of Condé his Brother,
by the insurrection of the Protestants, when Charles IX. visited his
Kingdom, Anno 1556. after which she put off her mourning.

The fourth Verse signifieth, that she should be long lived; for she lived
above 60 years, He saith also, that she was Regent by great luck, that
is, great luck for her self, but not for the Kingdom, for it was most
unhappy in her time.


LXIV.

    French.

    On ne tiendra pache aucun arresté,
    Tous recevants iront par tromperie,
    De trefue & paix, Terre & Mer protesté,
    Par Barcelone classe prins d’industrie.

    English.

    No agreement shall be kept,
    All those that shall admit of it deal falsly,
    There shall be protestations made by Land and Sea,
    Barcelone shall take a Fleet by craft.

ANNOT.

This is a description of the sad and calamitous estate of France,
in the time of the Civil wars, when no agreement could be kept on the
Roman Catholicks side, witness the several Peaces that were made and
broken, the Massacre of Vassa, and that infamous perfidy committed by
them on St. Bartholomews day, being the 24 of August, Anno 1572.


LXV.

    French.

    Gris & bureau demy ouverte guerre,
    De nuit seront assaillis & pillez,
    Le bureau prins passera par la serre,
    Son Temple ouvert, deux au plastre grillez.

    English.

    Between the Gray and sad Gray shall be half open War,
    By night they shall be assaulted and plundered,
    The sad Gray being taken, shall be put in Custody,
    His Temple shall be open, two shall be put in the Grate.

ANNOT.

This Stanza affordeth us a commical History, which is, that about the
year 1601. when there sprang up in France a Kind of Friers, who bosted
themselves to be the true observers of the Rule of St. Francis, and
that the Cordeliers and Capushines did not keep it so exactly, but they
had need of a great reformation; the King Henry IV. granted them a
Convent at Beaufort, and upon his example many other places desired
them, they went to possess themselves of the house of la Blamet, near
Angiers; but the Cordeliers being loath to be dispossessed by these
new comers, called Recollets, did besiege them by main force, broke
open the Gates, scaled the Walls, the besieged did not defend themselves
by words or exorcismes, but with good Stones and Flints, so that if the
people had not come, the fray would not have ended without murder, some
of them were put in Prison, others kept in Custody: this is the meaning
of the Author, when he saith, There will be half an open War between the
Gray and the sad Gray; for the Cordeliers have a Gray habit, and the
Recollets a sad Gray.


LXVI.

    French.

    Au fondement de nouvelle secte,
    Seront les os du grand Romain trouvez,
    Sepulchre en Marbre, apparoistra converte,
    Terre trembler en Auril mal enfeüvez.

    English.

    At the foundation of a new sect,
    The Bones of the great Roman shall be found,
    The Sepulchre shall appear covered with Marble,
    The Earth shall quake in April, they shall be ill buried.

ANNOT.

The meaning is, that when they shall go about to make a foundation of a
house, for a new Sect of Friers; they shall find the bones of a famous
Roman in a Marble Sepulchre, and that in April the Earth shall quake,
whereby many shall be swallowed up.


LXVII.

    French.

    Au grand Empire par viendra tout un autres,
    Bonté distant plees de felicité,
    Rege par un issu non loing du peautre,
    Corruer Regnes grande infelicité.

    English.

    To the great Empire quite another shall come,
    Being farther from goodness and happiness,
    Governed by one of base parentage,
    The Kingdom shall fall, a great unhappiness.

ANNOT.

This needeth no Interpretation.


LXVIII.

    French.

    Lors que Soldats fureur seditieuse,
    Contre leur Chef seront denuit fer livre,
    Ennemy d’Albe doibt par main furieuse,
    Lors vexer Rome & principaux seduire.

    English.

    When the seditious fury of the Souldiers,
    Against their Chief shall make the Iron shine by night,
    The enemy d’Albe shall by a furious hand,
    Then vex Rome, and seduce the principal one.

ANNOT.

The Lord de Thou doth judiciously observe, that the Pope being
unacquainted with things belonging to War, as to Money, Victuals, and
Ammunition, was easily persuaded by Cardinal Caraffa to make war
against Spain, for without being provided of all these things, he put
his Armies into the Field, nec satis perpendens quám a pecuniâ, milite
ac cæteris rebus ad bellum necessariis imparatus intempestive arma
sumeret.

In the 15. Book of his History: the Duke of Vrbin had commission to
raise 6000. Foot and 300. Horses in the Dukedom of Spoleto, and in
Mark of Ancona. John Caraffe the Popes Nephew was made General of
the Army, and being but Earl of Mortor, was Created Duke of Palliano,
by the confiscation of the goods of Mark Antony Colonna. Camillo
Ursini was made General of the Forces in Rome, and in the Territory
thereof; Blasius of Monluc, the Mars of his time, and by birth a
Gascon, was sent by the King to help (with his advice and courage) the
Romans, who are always fitter for the Breviary, then for the Sword.

Besides these Forces raised within the Church Dominions, Charles
Caraffa gathered all the Bandittes of Naples and Florence, and
raised some Regiments of Switzers that came to succour the Pope.

With these Troops the Pope seized upon the most important places and
persons belonging to the Spanish party, as the Coloneses and the
Vitelly.

These asked succours of the Emperour Charles the V. who presently
commanded Ferdinand of Toledo Duke of Alba to succour them. He was
then tasked in the Piemont and Milanes, to resist the French that
were then under the conduct of the Marshal of Brissac.

To conclude his design the better, he wrote many Letters to the Pope and
the Colledge of Cardinals, full of respect and submission, desiring them
to moderate their passion against the Spanish party, but the Pope being
angry by several reports, answered him, complaining of many things, which
made the Duke resolve to the war, and to be there in person.

He took his occasion as a prudent Captain, when the news was brought
to him that the Popes Forces were in mutiny against their General for
want of pay, and made a great tumult in the night, hearing that he was
approaching with a great train of Artillery. Bzovius saith, that the
Earl of Montor regarded more his profit then the Popes Interest, and
kept back a great part of the money that was to pay the Souldiers, whence
proceeded this tumult, which helped much the Duke of Alva’s business.

This is the explanation of the two first Verses of this Stanza,
concerning the mutiny of the Souldiers that were in the Popes service,
during which mutiny the enemy d’Alba did not fail to vex Rome; this
word the enemy d’Alba doth not signifie the enemy of the Duke of
Alba, as if one should say in Latine Hostis Albanus. He did then vex
Rome; for in a short time he took Ponte Corvino, Frusino Anagnia,
Marino, Lavaci, Prœneste, Tivoli, Ostia, Neptuno, Alba
Vico-Varro, Monte Fortino, and almost all the places of the Roman
Territory.

This did streighten Rome so much, that the General Camillo Ursini
made several Trenches within the Walls of Rome, instead of preserving
the outworks, as Montluc would have persuaded him to do; the alarums
were so great at Rome, that Montluc was fain to encourage the
Romans, and to make a Warlike Speech to them, which is inserted in his
Works.

Moreover, the same Duke began to seduce the Principals of Rome by his
friends that he had in it, but particularly by the cheat that he put
upon the Pope; for his design being to prevent the French Forces, and
to surprize the Pope, he resolved to go streight to Rome, and to bring
his design the better to pass, he sent Pyrrhus Coffrede to the Pope,
to see if there was any way of agreement, to the end that upon this
proposition the Pope should mistrust nothing. In the mean time the Duke
of Alba was coming near Rome, at which the Pope was so angry, that he
put this Embassadour in Prison, where he was kept till the conclusion of
the Peace; in this sort were the principal men of Rome seduced, having
no thought of the Spaniards approaches, this is the relation of the
Lord de Thou, Lib. 16.


LXIX.

    French.

    La grand pitie sera sans long tarder,
    Ceux qui donnoient seront contraints de prendre
    Nuds affamez, de froid, soif, soy bander,
    Passer les Monts en faisant grand esclandre.

    English.

    What a great pitty will it be e’re-long,
    Those that did give shall be constrained to receive,
    Naked, famished with cold, thirst, to mutiny,
    To go over the Mountains making great disorders.

ANNOT.

The words of the first Verse, before it be long, is the Key of the
Stanza, because we infer from thence it was shortly to happen, as in
truth it did at the latter end of the year 1556. when the Duke of Guise
came into Piemont to joyn with the Marshal of Brissac. Then the
troops of the Marshal seeing those of the Duke better paid then they
were, forsook the Marshal, the History saith there was above 1500. of
them, and that the Marshal paid the Souldiers of his own money to stay
them.

The great pitty was, when he had no more to give, he was compelled by the
Kings order it self, and against his own inclination to raise some moneys
upon the Countreys. Secondly, to take some Towns and give the plunder to
the Souldiers. Thirdly, to permit the Souldiers to pillage the Countrey.

The Author was willing to foretell this, because there was never a man
more strict in keeping the Martial discipline, then this General was.

The Marshal of Brissac being thus abused, some of his troops forsook
him to follow the Duke of Guise, being for the most part naked and
starved with cold, hunger and thirst, which makes the Author to specifie
hunger, cold and thirst; want having compelled them to disband, they
went over the Mountains, not of Piemont, but the Apennines of
Montserrat, and whatsoever thing they found was a Fish for their Net.


LXX.

    French.

    Un Chef du Monde le grand Cheiren sera,
    Plus outre, apres aime, craint, redouté,
    Son bruit & los les Cieux surpassera,
    Et du seul titre Victeur sort contente.

    English.

    A Chief of the World the great Cheiren shall be,
    Moreover, beloved afterwards, feared, dreaded,
    His fame and praise shall go beyond the Heavens,
    And shall be contented with the only title of Victor.

ANNOT.

We have said already before, that the Author by the word Cheyren
meaneth Henry the II. his Master, by transposition of Letters, who as
he saith was contented with the bare title of Victorieux, when he had
undertaken the protection of the German Princes against the Emperour
Charles the V.


LXXI.

    French.

    Quand on viendra le grand Roy parenter,
    Avant quil ait du tout l’Ame rendue,
    On le verra bien tost apparenter,
    D’Aigles, Lions, Croix, Courone de Rüe.

    English.

    When they shall come to celebrate the obsequies of the great King,
    A day before he be quite dead,
    He shall be seen presently to be allyed
    With Eagles, Lions, Crosses, Crowns of Rüe.

ANNOT.

In the general Peace made Anno 1559. two Marriages were concluded, one
of Elizabeth of France, daughter to Henry II. King of France,
with Philip II. King of Spain, which was Celebrated at Paris with
an extraordinary magnificence, in the presence of the Duke of Alba,
the Prince of Orenge, and the Earl of Egmont, who came to fetch the
Princess.

In the Celebrating of these Nuptials happened the unfortunate death of
Henry II. This brought such a sadness to the Court, that the second
match which was between Margaret of France, Daughter to Francis I.
and the Duke of Savoy was Celebrated without solemnity.

We must add to this, that the Duke weareth in his Coat of Arms some
Eagles, some Lions, some Crosses, and a Crown of Rue; by this, we
understand this Stanza, which saith, that the King being mortally
wounded, every one was preparing himself to render him the last duties,
which the Author calleth to Parante, from the Latine word Parentare,
which signifieth to Celebrate the Funeral duties of a man. Thus the
second Verse saith, before the day that he yieldeth up his Soul,
in hast was the Marriage Celebrated, between the Lady Margaret of
France, and the Duke of Savoy, who beareth for his Arms some Eagles,
some Lions, some Crosses, and a Crown of Rue.


LXXII.

    French.

    Par fureur feinte devotion Divine,
    Sera la femme du grand fort violée,
    Judges voulants damner telle Doctrine,
    Victime au peuple ignorant immolée.

    English.

    By a faigned fury of Divine inspiration,
    The wife of the great one shall be ravished,
    Judges willing to condemn such a Doctrine,
    A Victimo shall be sacrificed to the ignorant people.

ANNOT.

Of this fact and others as bad, have been seen strange examples, formerly
done by those called Enthousiastes, who have committed horrible
villanies, under pretence of divine inspiration, some commiting Incests,
others rapes, others murders, as may be seen at large in the History of
John de Leiden, and other desperate Anabaptists, too tedious to be
inserted here; I shall only relate here a little remarkable History, in
confirmation of this, to discover the Wiles of the spirits of error,
transformed into an Angel of Light.

The 7 day of February 1526. two Brothers, Thomas and Leonard
Schyker, living near the Town of St. Gal in Switzerland, did
assemble together with some other Anabaptists, in their fathers house,
where they passed the most part of the night in discourses, making
of faces, and relating of Visions, which every one said he had seen.
The next day, upon break of day; Thomas did lay hold on his Brother
Leonard, and dragged him in the middle of the company, bid him kneel
in the presence of his Father and Mother, and of all the rest there
present, and as all the rest of the Company bid him take heed to do any
thing amiss; he answered, that there was no need to fear, and that in
this business, nothing could be done against the Will of the Father;
thereupon he drew his Sword, and cut off the head of his Brother, who
was on his knees, all besotted before this murderer. All the rest being
astonished, and besides their wits for this furious blow, and lamenting
the dead, Thomas ran towards the Town with a fearful Countinance,
as a Phanatick besides himself, without Shooes; and having no Cloaths
but his Shirt and Breeches. At that time the Burg-master of St. Gal
was Joachim Vadian, a wise and learned person, before whom the said
Thomas stood, crying aloud with a fearful Countenance, that the day of
Judgment was near; saying besides, that strange things had come to pass,
(without telling what) that the will of his Father was done for his part.
The Burg-master after he had reprehended him very much for his madness,
and insolent carriage, commanded a Cloak to be put upon him, and to lead
him home softly back again. But in the mean time, news was brought of his
detestable murder, whereupon he was apprehended, examined, convicted,
and executed. The like hath been done many times for Rapes and Incests:
What is particular here, is, that our Author saith, that the Judges being
willing to punish such Villanies, yet that unhappy accident shall fall,
that an innocent person shall be put to death (belike) instead of the
guilty, to please the people.


LXXIII.

    French.

    En Cité grande en moyne & artisan,
    Pres de la porte logez & aux murailles,
    Contre modene secret, Cave disant,
    Trahis pour faire sous couleur d’espousailles.

    English.

    In a great City a Monk and an Artificer,
    Dwelling near the Gate, and the Walls,
    Near an old woman, ’tis a secret saying Cave,
    A Treason shall be plotted under pretence of a Marriage.

ANNOT.

Paradin maketh mention, that in the year 1552. a Monk deceived the
Marshal of Brissac, making him believe that he would put him in
possession of the Town of Quizres, if he would give him so much for
reward. The Marshal used all the Caution possible, not to be deceived
by that Imposter, who took Money on both sides, viz. the French and
the Spaniards; nevertheless the Monk plaid the Knave with him, and the
undertakings proved prejudicial to the French, though not considerably
by reason of the precaution of the said Marshal.

The same Author writes, that in the year 1555. the 17 of August,
the Spaniard had designed to retake Cazal, the same way that the
French had surprised it. First, they had got a Widow in the Town, who
received the undertakers in her house, which was near the Gate, and the
Wall. Secondly there was a Marriage to be made between two persons of
quality, where great Cheer and rejoycings were to be. Thirdly they got
a woman that carryed Herbs to sell in the Town, and under the Herbs the
Letters were hidden. The Author says likewise, that there was a Monk and
a Tradesman, that lodged at this Widows house, those two actors in this
business, viz. the Monk said Tradesman, ane secretly to the woman that
sold Herbs, Cave, which signifies take heed, they said these words
secretly near Matrone, that is, they whisperd in her ear Cave. Their
design was to betray the Town, under pretence of a Marriage, but it did
not succeed; because the Letters in the womans Basket were intercepted,
the Vulgar impression hath a fault in the third Verse, where there is
Modene instead of Matrone, and another in the fourth Verse, when instead
of Treason, they have put for betrayed. The History obligeth us to
correct it, as we have done.


LXXIV.

    French.

    Le dechassé au regne tournera,
    Ses ennemis trouvez des conjurez,
    Plus que jamais son temps triomphera,
    Trois & septante a mort trop asseurez.

    English.

    The expelled shall come again to the Kingdom,
    Her enemies shall be found to be the Conspirators,
    More than ever his time shall triumph,
    Three and seventy appointed for death.

ANNOT.

This is a clear and express prediction of the happy restauration of his
sacred Majesty, and our dread Sovereign Charles II. now Reigning,
who after a long exile is come again to enjoy his own Kingdom, and
to flourish more than ever he did before, by these seventy appointed
to death, are meant the Judges and murderers of his Father, who with
some few others of the same gang made about that number, and some of
which have payed their shot by the hand of publick Justice, others have
prevented their shame by dying before hand, others have been their own
Executioners, and those that remain, lead a life worse then death it
self; so true it is that vengeance dances the round.


LXXV.

    French.

    Le grand Pilot sera par Roy mandé,
    Laisser la classe pour plus haut lieu atteindre,
    Sept ans apres sera contrebandé,
    Barbare Armée viendra Venise craindre.

    English.

    The great Pilot shall be sent for by the King,
    To leave the Fleet, and be preferred to a higher place,
    Seven years after he shall be countermanded,
    A Barbarian Army shall put Venice to a fright.

ANNOT.

This needeth no further explanation.


LXXVI.

    French.

    La Cité antique d’Antenorée forge,
    Plus ne pouvant le Tyran supporter,
    Le manche feint au Temple couper gorge,
    Les siens le peuple a mort viendra bouter.

    English.

    The ancient City founded by Antenor,
    Being not able to bear the Tyrant any longer,
    With a fained haft, in the Church cut a throat,
    The people will come to put his servants to death.

ANNOT.

The City founded by Antenor (who was Companion and came into Italy
with Æneas) is Padua, a University of the Venetians, of which it is
said here, that being no longer able to bear a Tyrant, the said Tyrant
shall be murdered in the Church with a knife hidden in a haft, and all
his Men and Servants killed by the people of the Town.


LXXVII.

    French.

    Par la victoire du deceu fraudulente,
    Deux classes une, la revolte Germaine,
    La Chef meurtry & son fils dans la Tente,
    Florence, Imole pourchassez dans Romaine.

    English.

    By the deceitful victory of the deceived,
    One of the two Fleets shall revolt to the Germans,
    The Chief and his Son murdered in their Tent,
    Florence, Imole persecuted in Romania.

ANNOT.

The three first Verses are plain. Florence and Imole are two Cities
of Italy, seated in the Province of Romania.


LXXVIII.

    French.

    Crier victoire du grand Selin croissant,
    Par les Romains sera l’Aigle clamé,
    Ticin, Milan, & Gennesny consent
    Puis par eux mesmes Basil grand reclamé.

    English.

    They shall cry up the victory of the great Selins half Moon,
    By the Romans the Eagle shall be claimed,
    Ticin, Milan and Genoa, consent not,
    Then by themselves the great Basil shall be claimed.

ANNOT.

The first Verse foretelleth some conquests of the Turks, whose Arms
is the half Moon. The second Verse signifies, the Romans shall move
the Emperour to succour them, which is the Eagle. Ticin, Milan and
Genoa shall refuse to give help, and afterwards they shall call the
great Basil (which in Greek signifies the great King, from βασίλευς) to
their help.


LXXIX.

    French.

    Pres de Tesin les habitants de Logre,
    Garonne & Saone, Seine, Tar, & Gironde:
    Outre les Monts dresseront promonitoire,
    Conflict donné, Pau franchi, submerge onde.

    English.

    Near the Tesin the Inhabitants of Logre,
    Garonne and Saone, Seine, Tar and Gironde,
    Shall erect a promontory beyond the Mountains,
    A Battle shall be fought, the Po shall be passed over, some
      shall be drowned in it.

ANNOT.

Tesin is the River that passeth by Milan. Garonne, Saone,
Seine, Tar, and Gironde are Rivers of France. Po is the
greatest River of Italy.


LXXX.

    French.

    De Fez le Regne parviendra a ceux d’Europe,
    Feu leur Cité, & Lame tranchera,
    Le grand d’Asie Terre & Mer a grand troupe,
    Que bleux, pars, Croix a mort dechassera.

    English.

    The Kingdom of Fez shall come to those of Europe,
    Fire and Sword shall destroy their City,
    The great one of Asia by Land and Sea with a great troop,
    So that blews, greens, Crosses to death he shall drive.

ANNOT.

This is strange Prophecy if it prove true, viz. that the Kingdom of
Fez (which is in Africa) shall be taken by those of Europe, and the
Town put to Fire and Sword, after which the great one of Asia (meaning
the great Turk) shall come by Land and by Sea with an innumerable Army,
and shall drive and destroy all before him.


LXXXI.

    French.

    Pleurs, cris & plaincts, heurlemens, effrayeur,
    Cœur inhumain, cruel, noir & transy:
    Leman, les Isles de Gennes les majeurs,
    Sang espancher, tochsain, a nul mercy.

    English.

    Tears, cryes and complaints, howlings, fear,
    An inhumane heart, cruel, black, astonished,
    Leman, the Islands the great ones of Genoa,
    Shall spill blood, the Bell shall ring out, no mercy shall be given.

ANNOT.

This foretels bloody Wars only, and needs no interpretation.


LXXXII.

    French.

    Par les Deserts de lieu libre & farouche,
    Viendra errer Neveu du grand Pontife,
    Assomme a sept avec lourde souche,
    Par ceux qu’apres occuperont le Scyphe.

    English.

    Through the Deserts of a free and ragged place,
    The Nephew of the Pope shall come to wander,
    Knockt in the head by seven with a heavy Club,
    By those who after shall obtain the Scyphe.

ANNOT.

This signifies that the Nephew of a Pope shall be driven away, and shall
wander in a desert place, where he shall be knockt in the head by seven
men, one of which shall afterwards enjoy the Papacy; for Scyphe is a
Latine word, signifying a Cup or Chalue, such as the Romish Priests say
Mass with, and take the Sacrament.


LXXXIII.

    French.

    Celuy qu’aura tant d’honneurs & caresses,
    A son entrée en la Gaule Belgique,
    Un temps apres sera tant de rudesses,
    Et sera contre a la fleur tant bellique.

    English.

    He that shall have had so many honours and welcoms,
    At his going into Flanders,
    A while after shall commit so many rudenesses,
    And shall be against the warlike flower.

ANNOT.

This is positively concerning the Duke of Alencon, Brother to Henry
III. King of France, who having been sent for by the States of the
Low-Countreys, and received with much honour to be their General and
Governour against the Spaniard, did most unworthily break his trust,
and being come to Antwerp, he was so ravished with the beauty and
riches of the Town, that he seized upon it for himself, but was beaten
out by the Citizens, and most of his men killed.

The fourth Verse saith. He shall be against the warlike flower; that
is, his action shall be against Military Honour, and common practice of
Honourable Souldiers.


LXXXIV.

    French.

    Celuy qu’en Sparte Claude ne veut regner,
    Il fera tant par voye seductive,
    Que du court, long, le sera arraigner,
    Que contre Roy fera sa perspective.

    English.

    He that Claudius will not have to reign in Sparta,
    The same shall do so much by a deceitful way,
    That he shall cause him to be arraigned short and long,
    As if he had made his prospect upon the King.

ANNOT.

I believe the words of Claudius and Sparta here are Metaphorical, and
the Author was unwilling they should be known.

The sense is, one shall be hindred from Reigning by another, whom he
shall accuse of Treason against the King.


LXXXV.

    French.

    La grand Cité de Tharse par Gaulois,
    Sera d’estriute captifs tous a Turban,
    Secours par Mer du grand Portugalois,
    Premier d’esté le jour du sacre Vrban.

    English.

    The great City of Tharsis shall be taken by the French,
    All those that were at Turban shall be made slaves,
    Succours by Sea from the great Portugals,
    The first day of the Summer, and of the installation of Urban.

ANNOT.

Here are two difficulties in this Stanza; the first is, what the Author
means by the great City Tharsis; the second is in the last Verse, what
he meaneth by the Installation of Vrban, I believe he meaneth no more
then the election of a Pope, whose name shall be Urban.


LXXXVI.

    French.

    Le grand Prelat un jour apres son songe,
    Interprete au rebours de son sens,
    De la Gascogne luy surviendra un Monge,
    Qui fera eslire le grand Prelat de Sens.

    English.

    The great Prelate the next day after his dream,
    Interpreted contrary to his sense,
    From Gascony shall come to him a Monge,
    That shall cause the great Prelate of Sens to be elected.

ANNOT.

Monge is a Barbarous word, that hath no relation to any Language in the
world, (that I know) unless it signifies a Monk. Sens is a fine City,
about threescore Miles beyond Paris, towards the South, and the Seat of
an Arch-Bishop, who it seemeth shall be elected into some eminent place,
the next day after he that was in it shall dream a dream, that shall be
interpreted contrary to the sense and meaning of it.


LXXXVII.

    French.

    L’election faicte dans Francfort,
    N’aura nul lieu, Milan s’opposera,
    Le sien plus proche semblera si grand fort,
    Qu’oute le Rhin Marais les chassera.

    English.

    The election made at Francford,
    Shall be void, Milan shall oppose it,
    He of the Milan party shall be so strong,
    As to drive the other beyond the Marshes of the Rhine.

ANNOT.

The Election of Francford is concerning an Emperour; for there they are
elected, Crowned. The rest is plain.


LXXXVIII.

    French.

    Un Regne grand demourra desolé,
    Aupres de l’Hebro se seront assemblées,
    Monts Pyrenees le rendront consolé,
    Lors que dans May seront Terres tremblées.

    English.

    A great Kingdom shall be left desolate,
    Near the River Hebrus an assembly shall be made,
    The Pyrenean Mountains shall comfort him,
    When in May shall be an Earth-quake.

ANNOT.

This needeth no interpretation, but what any one may give that knoweth
where the River Hebrus is.


LXXXIX.

    French.

    Entre deux cymbes pieds & mains attachez,
    De miel face oingt & de laict substante,
    Guespes & mouches feront amour fachez,
    Poccilateurs faucer, Scyphe tente.

    English.

    Between two Boats one shall be tyed hand and foot,
    His face annointed with Honey, and he nourished with Milk,
    Wasps and Bees shall make much of him in anger,
    For being treacherous Cup-bearers, and poisoning the Cup.

ANNOT.

This is a description of the punishment which the Persians use to
afflict upon poisoners; for they were put between two Troughs, which are
here called Boats, from their likeness to them, with their face only
uncovered, which was daubed with Honey, that the Wasps and Bees might
be drawn to it and torment them, they were fed with Milk, which if they
refused to do, and had rather dye than be so tormented, then did the
Tormenter prick their Eyes with Needles to force them to their diet, and
so were they left, till the Vermin eat them up. We have an example of
this in the Life of Artaxerxes King of Persia.


XC.

    French.

    L’honnessement puant abominable,
    Apres la faict sera felicité,
    Grand excusé, pour n’estre favorable,
    Qu’a paix Neptune ne sera incité.

    English.

    The stinking and abominable defiling
    After the secret shall succeed well,
    The great one shall be excused for not being favourable,
    That Neptune might be perswaded to peace.

ANNOT.

By the two first Verses it seemeth that some abominable action, after its
effect shall succeed well; the two last signifie, that a great person
shall be excused for not permitting the Fleet to be at peace.


XCI.

    French.

    Le conducteur de la guerre Navale,
    Rouge effrené, severe horrible grippe,
    Captif eschapé de l’aisné dans la baste,
    Quand il naistra du grand un Fils Agrippe.

    English.

    The leader of the naval forces,
    Red, rash, severe, horrible extortioner,
    Being slave, shall escape, hidden amongst the Harnesses,
    When a Son named Agrippa, shall be born to the great one.

ANNOT.

This needeth no Interpretation, the words being so plain.


XCII.

    French.

    Princesse de beauté tant venuste,
    Au chef menée, le second faict trahy,
    La Cité au Glaive poudre face aduste,
    Par trop grand meurtre le chef du Roy hay.

    English.

    A Princess of an exquisite beauty,
    Shall be brought to the General, the second time the fact shall be
      betrayed,
    The City shall be given to the Sword and fire,
    By two great a murder the chief Person about the King shall be hated.

ANNOT.

The only difficulty lyes in what City he doth mean.


XCIII.

    French.

    Prelat avare, d’ambition trompé,
    Rien ne fera que trop cuider viendra,
    Ses Messagers, & luy bien attrapé,
    Tout au rebours voir qui les bois fendra.

    English.

    A covetous Prelate, deceived by ambition,
    Shall do nothing but covet too much,
    His messengers and he shall be trapt,
    When they shall see one cleave the Wood the contrary way.

ANNOT.

This needeth no Annotation.


XCIV.

    French.

    Un Roy iré sera aux sedifragues,
    Quand interdicts seront harnois de guerre,
    La poison taincte au succre par les fragues,
    Par eaux meurtris, morts, disant, serre, serre.

    English.

    A King shall be angry against the Covenant-breakers,
    When the Warlike Armour shall be forbidden,
    The Poison with Sugar shall be put in the Strawberries,
    They shall be murdered and die, saying, close, close.

ANNOT.

The words are plain.


XCV.

    French.

    Par detracteur calomnié puis nay,
    Quand istront faicts enormes & martiaux,
    La moindre part dubieuse a l’aisné,
    Et tost au Regne seront faicts partiaux.

    English.

    The youngest Son shall be calumniated by a slanderer,
    When enormous and Martial deeds shall be done,
    The least part shall be left doubtfull to the
    Eldest, and soon after they shall be both equal in the Kingdom.

ANNOT.

This lacketh no interpretation.


XCVI.

    French.

    Grand Cité a Soldats abandonnée,
    Onc ny eut mortel tumult si proche,
    O quelle hideuse calamités approche,
    Fors une offence n’y sera pardonnée.

    English.

    A great City shall be given up to the Souldiers,
    There was never a mortal tumult so near,
    Oh! what a hideous calamity draws near,
    Except one offence nothing shall be spared.

ANNOT.

This is concerning the taking of the Town of St. Quentin in 1557.
because the Author saith, no tumult was like this, so near the year 1555.
when our Author writ.

He calleth it great City; because it is one of the most considerable in
France, therefore it was besieged by the King of Spain with 37000.
men, and 12000. Horses and 8000. English. The plunder was given to the
Souldiers; for it was taken by assault.

There was never a mortal tumult so near; for the Souldiers taking
revenge upon the Inhabitants, and Garrison, put all to the Sword; the
Admiral having much ado to save himself.

In consequence of this our Prophet cryeth, O what a fearfull calamity;
because the taking of this Town joyned with the loss of St. Laurence
did almost ruine France. He addeth, except one offence nothing shall
be forgiven; that is, the Town should be afflicted in all respects,
except that it should not be burnt. The taking of this Town was upon the
27 of August, 17 days after the Battle of St. Laurence.

The loss was so great to France, that the King was fained to call the
Duke of Guise back from Italy, and Charles V. hearing this news,
asked presently if his Son Philip was not in Paris, as much as to
say, it was a thing he ought to have done.

But God permitted that the King of Spain went another way, and in the
mean time, the King of France strengthned himself, and the Duke of
Guise took from the English, Calais, Guines, and the County of
d’Oye. The Spanish History saith, that Philip had forbidden to
touch any old people, Children and Ecclesiastical persons; but above all
St. Quentins reliques.


XCVII.

    French.

    Cinq & quarante degrez ciel bruslera,
    Feu approcher de la grand Cité neuve,
    Instant grand flamme esparse sautera,
    Quand on voudra des Normans faire preuve.

    English.

    The Heaven shall burn at five and forty degrees,
    The fire shall come near the great new City,
    In an instant a great flame dispersed shall burst out,
    When they shall make a trial of the Normans.

ANNOT.

This signifies some extraordinary lightning under five and forty degrees,
which is about the Southern part of France.

It is not easie to guess what he meaneth by the great new City, unless it
be one in the Authors Countrey, called Villa Nova.

The last Verse seemeth to intimate, that this shall happen when an Army
of Normandie shall be raised.


XCVIII.

    French.

    Ruyne aux Volsques de peur si fort terribles,
    Leur grand Cité taincte, faict pestilent:
    Piller Sol, Lune, & violer leur Temples,
    Et les deux Fleuves rougir de sang coulant.

    English.

    A ruine shall happen to the Volsques that are so terrible,
    Their great City shall be dyed, a pestilent deed:
    They shall plunder Sun and Moon, and violate their Temples,
    And the two Rivers shall be red with running blood.

ANNOT.

The Volsi were a warlike people of Italy joyning to Rome, which
makes me believe that by the great City he meaneth Rome, which was
plundered and sackt by the Duke of Burgondy and the Prince of Orange,
Generals of the Emperour Charles V.


XCIX.

    French.

    L’Ennemy docte se tournera confus,
    Grand Camp malade, & de faict par embusches
    Monts Pyrenees luy seront faicts refus.
    Roche du Fleuve descouvrant antique ruches.

    English.

    The learned enemy shall go back confounded,
    A great Camp shall be sick, and in effect through ambush,
    The Pyrenean Mountains shall refuse him.
    Near the River discovering the ancient Hives.

ANNOT.

The words are plain, though the sense be too obscure, and I shall not
endeavour to give an interpretation, when every one may make one himself.


C.

    French.

    Fill de Laure, asyle du mal sain,
    Ou jusqu’au Ciel se void l’Amphitheatre:
    Prodige veu, ton mal est fort prochain,
    Seras captive, & des fois plus de quatre.

    English.

    Daughter of Laura, Sanctuary of the sick,
    Where to the Heavens is seen the Amphitheatre,
    A prodigy being seen, the danger is near,
    Thou shalt be taken captive above four times.

ANNOT.

This is an ingenious Stanza, concerning the City of Nismes in
Languedoc, famous for its Amphitheatre built by the Romans, and
remaining to this day, which Town he calleth Daughter of Laura, because
the Lady Laura, Mistress to the famous Poet Petrarche was born
thereabout; he also calleth it Sanctuary of the sick, for the salubrity
of the air.

The meaning of the two last Verses is, that when a prodigy shall be seen,
viz. Civil War in France, it shall be taken above four times, as it
hath happened by one party or other.


Legis cautio contra ineptos Criticos.

    Qui legent hos versus, maturè censunto:
    Prophanum vulgus & inscium ne attrectato:
    Omnesque Astrologi, Blenni, Barbari procul sunto,
    Qui aliter faxit, is rite sacer esto.




THE PROPHECIES OF Michael Nostradamus.

CENTURY VII.


I.

    French.

    L’Arc du Thresor par Achilles deceu,
    Aux procrées sceu le Quadrangulaire,
    Au fait Roial le comment sera sceu,
    Corps veu pendu au Sceu du populaire.

    English.

    The bow of the Treasure by Achilles deceived,
    Shall shew to posterity the Quadrangulary,
    In the Royal deed the Comment shall be known,
    The body shall be seen hanged in the knowledge of the people.

ANNOT.

By the bow of the Treasure, is understood the Marshal d’Ancre, Favorite
to the Queen Regent of France Mary of Medicis, who was first
complained of, for his maleversations by Achilles de Harlay President
of Paris, whence followed his death being Pistolled in the Quadrangle
of the Louvre, by the command of Lewis XIII. and his body afterwards
dragged through the streets, and hanged publickly by the people upon the
new Bridge.


II.

    French.

    Par Mars ouvert Arles ne donra guerre,
    De nuit seront les Soldats estonnez,
    Noir, blanc, a l’Inde dissimulez en terre.
    Soubs la feinte ombre traistre verrez sonnez.

    English.

    Arles shall not proceed by open War,
    By night the Souldiers shall be astonished,
    Black, white, and blew, dissembled upon the ground.
    Under the fained shadow you shall see them proclaimed Traitors.

ANNOT.

Arles is a considerable City in France; the rest is plain.


III.

    French.

    Apres de France la victoire Navale,
    Les Barchinons, Salinons, les Phocens,
    Lierre d’or, l’Enclume serré dans balle,
    Ceux de Toulon au fraud seront consents.

    English.

    After the Naval victory of the French,
    Upon those of Tunis, Sally, and the Phocens,
    A golden Juy the Anvil shut up in a pack,
    Those of Toulon to the fraud shall consent.

ANNOT.

This foretelleth a Naval victory to the French against the Turks, by
the means of a Granado, called Anvil, that shall be shut up in a Barrel
by a plot, to which those of Toulon shall be privy.


IV.

    French.

    Le Duc de Langres assiegé dedans Dole,
    Accompagné d’Authun & Lionnois,
    Geneve, Auspourg, ceux de la Mirandole,
    Passer les Monts contre les Anconois.

    English.

    The Duke of Langres shall be besieged in Dole,
    Being in company with those of Autun and Lion,
    Geneva, Auspourg, those of Mirandola,
    Shall go over the Mountains against those of Ancona.

ANNOT.

Langres is a City in France, whose Bishop is a Duke and a Peer of
the Kingdom; Dole is a City in Burgundy, so is Autun and Lion,
Geneva is a City by Savoy, Auspourg, another in Germany,
Mirandola is a Countrey in Italy, so is Ancona.


V.

    French.

    Vin sur la Table en sera respandu,
    Le tiers naura celle quil pretendoit,
    Deux fois du noir de Parme descendu,
    Perouse & Pise fera ce quil cuidoit.

    English.

    Wine shall be spilt upon the Table,
    By reason that a third man shall not have her whom he intended,
    Twice the black one descended from Parma,
    Shall do to Perusa and Pisa what he intended.

ANNOT.

Perusa, Pisa, and Parma, are three Cities in Italy.


VI.

    French.

    Naples, Palerme, & toute la Sicile,
    Par main Barbare sera inhabitée,
    Corsique, Salerne & de Sardaigne l’Isle,
    Faim, peste, guerre, fin de maux intemptée.

    English.

    Naples, Palermo, and all Sicily,
    By barbarous hands shall be depopulated,
    Corsica, Salerno, and the Island of Sardinia,
    In them shall be famine, plague, war, and endless evils.

ANNOT.

Naples is a City in Italy, Palermo is a City in the Island of
Sicily. Corsica, an Island in the Mediterranean Sea, belonging to
the Genoese; Salerno is a Town in Italy; Sardinia an Island in
the Mediterranean. The Reader may easily make an interpretation of the
rest.


VII.

    French.

    Sur le combat des grands chevaux legers,
    On criera le grand croissant confond,
    De nuit tuer Moutons, Brebis, Bergers,
    Abysmes rouges dans le fossé profond.

    English.

    At the fight of the great light Horsmen,
    They shall cry out, confound the great half Moon,
    By night they shall kill Sheep, Ewes, and Shepherds,
    Red pits shall be in the deep ditch.

ANNOT.

By the great half Moon, is understood the Turk.


VIII.

    French.

    Flora fuis, fuis le plus proche Romain,
    Au Fesulan sera conflict donné,
    Sang espandu les plus grands pris en main,
    Temple ne Sexe ne sera pardonné.

    English.

    Flora fly, fly from the next Roman,
    In the Fesulan shall be the fight,
    Blood shall be spilt, the greatest shall be taken,
    Temple nor Sex shall be spared.

ANNOT.

Fesulan is a Countrey in Italy. Flora is the Goddess of Flowers,
the rest is easie.


IX.

    French.

    Dame en l’absence de son grand Capitaine,
    Sera priée d’amour du Viceroy,
    Feinte promesse & malheureuse estreine,
    Entre les mains du grand Prince Barroy.

    English.

    A Lady in the absence of her great Captain,
    Shall be intreated of love by the Viceroy,
    A fained promise, and unhappy new years gift,
    In the hand of the great Prince of Bar.

ANNOT.

Bar is a principality joyning to Lorrain, which Henry IV. King of
France gave for a Portion to his Sister Catharine, when she married
the Duke of Lorrains Son. The rest is plain.


X.

    French.

    Par le grand Prince limitrophe du Mans,
    Preux & vaillant chef de grand exercite,
    Par Mer & Terre de Galois & Normans,
    Cap passer Barcelonne pillé l’Isle.

    English.

    The great Prince dwelling near the Mans,
    Stout and valiant, General of a great Army,
    Of Welchmen and Normans by Sea and Land,
    Shall pass the Cape Barcelone, and plunder the Island.

ANNOT.

Mans is a City in France, chief of the Province called le Main. The
rest is plain.


XI.

    French.

    L’Enfant Roial contemnera la Mere,
    Oeil, pieds blessez, rude inobeissant,
    Nouvelle a Dame estrange & bien amere,
    Seront tuez des siens plus de cinq cens.

    English.

    The Royal Child shall despise his Mother,
    Eye, feet wounded, rude disobedient,
    News to a Lady very strange and bitter,
    There shall be killed of hers above five hundred.

ANNOT.

This was fulfilled about the year 1615. when Lewis XIII. King of
France, being then about 15 years of age, by the perswasion of some
Grandees about him, made War against his own Mother Mary of Medicis,
then Regent of the Kingdom, whereupon was fought between them the Battle
du pont de say, where above five hundred on the Queens side were slain,
whereupon it was a good Jest of the Prince of Guimena, who being
required by the Queen Anna of Austria, to lay his hand upon her side;
and to feel her Child (now Lewis XIV.) stirring, after he had felt; now
I know, said he, he is a true Son of Bourbon; for he beginneth to kick
his Mother.


XII.

    French.

    Le grand puisnay fera fin de la guerre,
    En deux lieux assemble les excusez,
    Cahors, Moissac, iront loing de la serre,
    Rufec, Lectoure, les Agenois rasez.

    English.

    The great younger Brother shall make an end of the War,
    In two places he shall gather the excused,
    Cahors, Moissac, shall go out of his clutches,
    Ruffec, Lectoure, and those of Agen shall be cut off.

ANNOT.

Cahors, Moissac, Ruffec, Lectoure, Agen, are all Cities of the
Province of Guyenne in France.


XIII.

    French.

    De la Cité Marine & tributaire,
    La teste rase prendra la Satrapie,
    Chasser sordide qui puis sera contraire,
    Par quatorze and tiendra la Tyrannie.

    English.

    Of the City Maritine and tributary,
    The shaven head shall take the Government,
    He shall turn out a base man who shall be against him,
    During fourteen years he will keep the tyranny.

ANNOT.

This is positive concerning the Cardinal of Richelieu, who made himself
Governor of Havre de Grace, called here the Maritine City, and there
kept his Treasure, and tyrannised for the space of about fourteen years.


XIV.

    French.

    Faux exposer viendra Topographie,
    Seront les Urnes des Monuments ouvertes,
    Pulluler Sectes, sainte Philosophie,
    Pour blanches noires, & pour antiques vertes.

    English.

    They shall expound Topography falsly,
    The Urnes of the Monuments shall be open,
    Sects shall multiply, and holy Philosophy
    Shall give black for white, and green for old.

ANNOT.

This is a perfect description of our late miserable estate in England,
when there was such multiplicity of Sects, and such a Prophanation of
sacred things.


XV.

    French.

    Devant Cité de l’Insubre Countrée,
    Sept ans sera le Siege devant mis,
    Le tres-grand Roy fera son entrée,
    Cité puis libre hors de ses ennemis.

    English.

    Before a City of Piemont,
    Seven years the Siege shall be laid,
    The most great King shall make his entry into it,
    Then the City shall be free being out of the enemies hand.

ANNOT.

This needeth no interpretation.


XVI.

    French.

    Entrée profonde par la grande Roine faite,
    Rendra le lieu puissant inaccessible,
    L’Armée de trois Lions sera défaite,
    Faisant dedans cas hideux & terrible.

    English.

    The deep entry made by the Queen,
    Shall make the place powerful and inaccessible,
    The Army of the three Lions shall be routed,
    Doing within an hideous and terrible thing.

ANNOT.

A Queen shall cause such a deep Trench to be made before a Town, that it
shall be impregnable, and the Army of Lions, that is either Generals, or
of a Prince that shall bear three Lions in his Arms, shall be routed.


XVII.

    French.

    Le Prince rare en pitié & clemence,
    Apres avoir la paix aux siens baillé,
    Viendra changer par mort grand cognoissance,
    Apres grand repos le regne travaillé.

    English.

    The Prince rare in pity and Clemency,
    After he shall have given peace to his Subjects,
    Shall by death change his great knowledge,
    After great rest the Kingdom shall be troubled.

ANNOT.

This positively concerneth Henry the IV. King of France; who after
he had by many Battles and dangers given peace to his Kingdom, was by a
Murderer snatched away, and the Kingdom put into new troubles, by the war
that the Princes had among themselves.


XVIII.

    French.

    Les Assiegez couloureront leurs paches,
    Sept jours apres feront cruelle issüe,
    Dans repoulsez, feu, sang, sept mis a l’hache,
    Dame captive qu’avoit la paix issüe.

    English.

    The Besieged shall dawb their Articles,
    Seven days after they shall make a cruel event,
    They shall be beaten back, fire, blood, seven put to death,
    The Lady shall be Prisoner who endeavoured to make peace.

ANNOT.

This needeth no interpretation.


XIX.

    French.

    Le Fort Nicene ne sera combatu,
    Vaincu sera par rutilant metal,
    Son fait sera un long temps debatu,
    Aux Citadins estrange espouvental.

    English.

    The Fort Nicene shall not be fought against,
    By shining metal it shall be overcome,
    The doing of it shall be long and debating,
    It shall be a strange fearful thing to the Citizens.

ANNOT.

Nice is a Town in Piemont, situated by the Sea side, now whether
this Prophecy came to pass in the time of the Wars between France and
Savoy, or shall come to pass hereafter, it is more then I can tell. As
for winning of it by glistering Metal, it is no new thing or practice,
witness Philippus of Macedon, who said no City was impregnable,
wherein might enter an Ass loaded with gold.


XX.

    French.

    Ambassadeurs de la Toscane langue,
    Avril & May Alpes & Mer passer,
    Celuy de Veau exposera l’harangue,
    Vie Gauloise en voulant effacer.

    English.

    The Embassadors of the Tuscan tongue,
    In April and May, shall go over the Alpes and the Sea,
    One like a Calf shall make a speech:
    Attempting to defame the French customes.

ANNOT.

The sense and the words are plain.


XXI.

    French.

    Par pestilente inimitie Volsicque,
    Dissimulée chassera le Tyran,
    Au Pont de Sorgues se fera la trafique,
    De mettre a mort luy & son adherent.

    English.

    By a pestilent Italian enmity,
    The dissembler shall expel the Tyrant,
    The bargain shall be made at Sorgues Bridge,
    To put him and his adherent to death.

ANNOT.

There is no difficulty in this.


XXII.

    French.

    Les Citoiens de Mesopotamie,
    Irez encontre amis de Tarragone,
    Jeux, Ris, Banquets toute gent endormie,
    Vicaire au Prone, pris Cité, ceux d’Ausone.

    English.

    The Citizens of Mesopotamia,
    Being angry with the friends of Tarragone,
    Playes, laughter, feasts, every body being asleep,
    The Vicar being in the Pulpit, City taken by those of Ausone.

ANNOT.

By the Citizens of Mesopotamia, is understood a people that live
between two Rivers, from the Greek words μέσος and ποταμὸς, the rest is
easie. We have said before, that by Ausone the Author understands the
City of Bourdeaux, which he called Ausone, from the Poet and Consul
of Rome Ausonius who was born there.


XXIII.

    French.

    Le Roial Sceptre sera contraint de prendre,
    Ce que ses Predecesseurs voient engagé,
    Puis a Laigneau on fera mal entendre,
    Lors qu’on viendra le Palais saccager.

    English.

    The Royal Scepter shall be constrained to take
    What his Predecessors had morgaged;
    After that, they shall mis-inform the Lamb,
    When they shall come to plunder the Palace.

ANNOT.

This is obvious to every body’s capacity.


XXIV.

    French.

    L’Ensevely sortira du tombeau,
    Fera de chaisnes lier le fort du pont,
    Empoisoné avec œufs de Barbeau,
    Grand de Lorrain par le Marquis du pont.

    English.

    The buried shall come out of his Grave,
    He shall cause the fort of the Bridge to be tied with Chains,
    Poisoned with Barbels hard Row,
    Shall a great one of Lorrain be by the Marques du pont.

ANNOT.

This Prophecie is divided in two parts. The first two Verses talk of a
man that shall be taken out of his Grave alive. The two last speak, that
a great man of Lorrain shall be poisoned by the Marques de pont, in
the Row of a Barbel, which according to Physitians, is a dangerous meat
of it self, and chiefly if it be Stewed, the Poisoner himself seemeth to
be no other than a Duke of Lorrain, or one of his Sons, for he stileth
himself N. Duke of Lorrain, Prince of Bar, and Marques du Pont.


XXV.

    French.

    Par guerre longue tout l’exercite espuiser,
    Que pour Soldats ne trouveront pecune,
    Lieu d’Or, d’Argent cair on viendra cuser,
    Gaulois Ærain, signe croissant de Lune.

    English.

    By a long War, all the Army drained dry,
    So that to raise Souldiers they shall find no Money,
    Instead of Gold and Silver, they shall stamp Leather,
    The French Copper, the mark of the stamp the new Moon.

ANNOT.

This maketh me remember the miserable condition of many Kingdoms, before
the west-Indies were discovered; for in Spain Lead was stamped for
Money, and so in France in the time of King Dagobert, and it seemeth
by this Stanza, that the like is to come again, by reason of a long and
tedious War.


XXVI.

    French.

    Fustes Galées autour de sept Navires,
    Sera livrée une mortelle guerre,
    Chef de Madrid recevra coups de vires,
    Deux eschapées & cinq menez a Terre.

    English.

    Fly-boats and Galleys round about seven Ships,
    A mortal War there shall be,
    The chief of Madrid shall receive blows of Oars,
    Two shall escape, and five carried to Land.

ANNOT.

Paradin saith in his History, that in the year 1555. towards the end
of August, those of Diepe had permission from the King to fight a
Fleet of the Spaniards, which was coming into Flanders, and brought
Men, Money, and several Merchandises. They went to Sea, and after much
searching, they discovered the Fleet, wherein were 22 great Ships.

The Diepois had but 19 men of War, and five or six Pinnaces, with which
they set upon them between Calais and Dover. The fight was very
bloody, almost all the Ships grapled one with another, and being so close
together, represented a Land fight.

The French at last did their utmost endeavour against the Admiral,
which was succoured by six other Ships, of which two were taken with the
Admiral, and carryed to Diepe; this is the Authors meaning, when he
saith, Fly-boats and Galleys about seven Ships. He nameth the Admiral
Chief of Madrid; that is, chief Spaniard, which received blows of
Oars, whose Ship was taken, and four more of his Company, which were
brought to Diepe. In this agree the Historians on both sides.


XXVII.

    French.

    Au coin de Vast la grand Cavalerie,
    Proche a Ferrare empeschée au Bagage,
    Pompe a Turin front telle volerie,
    Que dans le fort raviront leur hostage.

    English.

    In the corner of Vast the great Troop of Horse,
    Near Ferrara, shall be busied about the baggage,
    Pompe at Turin, they shall make such a robbery,
    That in the Fort they shall ravish their hostage.

ANNOT.

I could not find what he meaneth by this place Vast, which being the
Key of all the rest, I could proceed no further, but am constrained to go
to bed, and leave this for to night, among Insolubilia de Alliaco.


XXVIII.

    French.

    Le Capitaine conduira grande proye,
    Sur la Montagne des ennemis plus proche,
    Environné par feu fera telle voye,
    Tous eschapez, or trente mis en broche.

    English.

    The Captain shall lead a great Prey
    Upon the Mountain, that shall be nearest to the Enemies,
    Being encompassed with fire, he shall make such a way,
    That all shall escape, but thirty that shall be spitted.

ANNOT.

The two first Verses are plain.

The meaning of the last two is, that the said Captain being encompassed
with Fire, shall make himself such a way, that all his men shall escape,
but thirty that shall be spitted by the enemies.


XXIX.

    French.

    Le grand Duc d’Albe se viendra rebeller,
    A ses grands peres fera le tradiment,
    Le grand de Guise le viendra debeller,
    Captif mené & dresse monument.

    English.

    The great Duke of Alba shall rebel,
    To his Grandfathers he shall make the Plot,
    The great Guise shall vanquish him,
    Led Prisoner, and a Monument erected.

ANNOT.

Ferdinand of Toledo, Duke of Alba in Spain, a faithfull servant
of Charles V. and Philip II. his Son, after he had made several
proofs of his Valour, and prudence in the affairs of Piemont and
Milanese, was commanded to go to Naples and Rome, to succour the
Colonesse, and others of the Spanish party; to obey this command,
the Author saith, He went about to rebel, not against his Prince, but
his Grandfathers, viz. the Pope and the Cardinals, upon which the
Senate of Venice wrote to him, desiring that he would not trouble the
Pope, seeing that all his Predecessors had fought for him, as the Lord of
Thou saith in his sixteenth Book; but he answered, that it was the Pope
himself that was the cause of it, and that he was bound to oppose him.

During that rebellion to his great fathers, as the Author calleth it, the
great de Guise, came with his Troops, and compelled him to a diversion,
and to let alone Marshal Strozzy, the Cardinal Caraffa, Captain
Montluc, Camillo Ursini, Captain Charry, and others; so that all
the Countrey about Rome was freed, and thus the Author saith, the
great de Guise shall come to quell him.

The fourth Verse addeth two things, that a Prisoner was carryed away, and
that a Monument was erected. History makes no mention of the Prisoner,
unless it were that Captain Montluc, having taken by assault the
Town of Pianea or Corsmian, by a sink which he broke; the Captain
Gougues a Gascon being a Prisoner of War in the Town, with many
others, and hearing the cries of France, France, perswaded his Comrades
to fall upon their Keepers, and to kill them with their own weapons and
this Prisoner that was taken at Montisel, was brought back again into
France, as well for his known Valour, as for his Warlike deliverance,
and since that made himself famous in Florida.

As for the Monument erected, makes me think he meaneth the Constable of
France, who was taken Prisoner at the Battle of St. Quentin, and by
the Monument, he meaneth the Escurial, which Philip the II. caused
to be built in memory of that Victory, which obliged Henry the II. to
call back again in all hast the Duke of Guise with all his Forces, or
else France had been in danger to be lost.


XXX.

    French.

    Le sac sapproche, feu, grand sang espandu,
    Pau grand Fleuve, aux Bouviers l’entreprise,
    De Genes, Nice apres long temps attendu,
    Fossan, Thurin, a Savillan la prise.

    English.

    The plundering draws near, fire, abundance of blood spilt,
    Pau a great River, an enterprise by Herdsmen,
    Of Genes, Nice after they shall have staid long,
    Fossan, Thurin, the prize shall be at Savillan.

ANNOT.

The plundering draweth near, here the Author speaketh of things that
should happen in his days. He writ this the first of March 1555.
and History mentioneth that from the first of March 1555. till the
beginning of 1559. the plundering of Piemont in Italy was very great,
since the taking of Cazal by the French, for there was nothing but
continual fightings, taking and retaking Towns, Skirmishes and Battles,
and most of them by the River Pau, the greatest of Italy. The rest
of the second Verse, and the beginning of the third saith, that the
undertaking of Genoa shall be by the Herdsmen, by whom he meaneth the
Turks, who being called by the French to help them in the taking of
Nice, made an action fit for Herdsmen and villanous Traitors, doing
nothing, because they had been bribed by the Genoeses.

This was done after the French had stay’d long for this infidel, who
endeavoured to delude the French, and take all for himself; and this
is the meaning of, After Nice had stayed long. In the mean time the
Spaniards increased their Victories, as the fourth Verse witnesseth to
the taking of Fossan, Thurin, and Savillan.

Fossan is a Town of Piemont, which that it might be distinguished
from Marseilles, which the Author often calleth Fossen or Phocen,
he putteth in the Epithete of Thurin, to signifie he meaneth Fossan
in Piemont.

He saith that Fossan of Piemont shall have the taking towards
Savillan, that is, this Fossan which belongeth to the Spaniards,
will take some Towns near Sivillan.


XXXI.

    French.

    De Languedoc, & Guienna plus de dix
    Mille, voudront les Alpes repasser.
    Grans Allobroges marcher contre Brundis,
    Aquin & Bresse les viendront recasser.

    English.

    From Languedoc, and Guienna more then 10000.
    Would be glad to come back over the Alpes.
    Great Allobroges shall march against Brundis,
    Aquin and Bresse shall beat them back.

ANNOT.

Languedoc and Guienne are two Provinces in France, from whence many
Souldiers shall be raised to go into Italy, but being distressed, shall
wish to come back again over the Alpes. By the great Allobroges,
I understand those of Savoy and Piemont, who shall go against
Brundis, in Latine Brundusium, but shall be beaten back by Aquin
and Bresses, Cities belonging to the Venetians.


XXXII.

    French.

    Du Mont Royal naistra d’une Casane,
    Qui Duc, & Compte viendra tyranniser,
    Dresser Copie de la marche Millane,
    Favence, Florence d’or & gens espuiser.

    English.

    Out of the Royal Mount shall be born in a Cottage,
    One that shall tyranise over Duke and Earl,
    He shall raise an Army in the Land of Millan,
    He shall exhaust Favence and Florence of their gold.

ANNOT.

This needeth no Interpretation.


XXXIII.

    French.

    Par fraude Regne, forces expolier,
    La classe obsesse, passages a l’espie,
    Deux faincts amis se viendront r’allier,
    Esueiller haine de long temps assoupie.

    English.

    By fraud a Kingdom and an Army shall be spoilt,
    The Fleet shall be put to a strait, passages shall be made to the
      spies,
    Two feigned friends shall agree together,
    They shall raise up a hatred that had been long dormant.

ANNOT.

The words are plain.


XXXIV.

    French.

    En grand regret sera la gent Gauloise,
    Cœur vain, leger croira temerité,
    Pain, sel, ne vin eau venin ne cervoise,
    Plus grand captif, faim, froid, necessité.

    English.

    In great regret shall the French Nation be.
    Their vain and light heart shall believe rashly.
    They shall have neither Bread, Salt, Wine, nor Beer,
    Moreover they shall be Prisoners, and shall suffer hunger, cold,
      and need.

ANNOT.

The words are plain, and the onely question is whither this distress
threatned here to France is past or to come.


XXXV.

    French.

    La grand poche viendra plaindre pleurer,
    D’avoir esleu, trompez seront en l’Aage,
    Guiere avec eux ne voudra demeurer,
    Deceu sera par ceux de son langage.

    English.

    The great Pocket shall bewaile and bemoan,
    For having Elected one, they shall be deceived in his Age,
    He shall not stay long with them,
    He shall be deceived by those of his own language.

ANNOT.

The great Pocket which is the Key of this Stanza being obscure, forceth
me to leave the rest unperfect.


XXXVI.

    French.

    Dieu, le Ciel tout le Divin Verbe a l’Onde,
    Porté par rouges sept razes a Bizance,
    Contre les oingts trois cens de Trebisonde,
    Deux Loix mettront, & horreur, puis credence.

    English.

    God, Heaven, all the Divine Word in water,
    Carryed by red ones, seven shaved heads at Bisantium,
    Against the anointed three hundred of Trebisond,
    They shall put two Laws, and horror, and afterwards believe.

ANNOT.

This seemeth to foretel that the Sacrament according to the
Roman Church, shall be carried by Cardinals and seven Priests to
Constantinople, against which three hundred of Trebison shall
dispute, who shall compare the two Laws with horror, and afterwards
believe.


XXXVII.

    French.

    Dix envoyez, chef de nef mettre a mort,
    D’un adverty, en classe guerre ouverte,
    Confusion chef, l’un se picque & mord,
    Leryn, Stecades nefs, cap dedans la nerte.

    English.

    Ten shall be sent to put the Captain of the Ship to death,
    He shall have notice by one, the Fleet shall be in open War,
    A confusion shall be amongst the Chief, one pricks and bites,
    Leryn, Stecades nefs, caps dedans la nerte.

ANNOT.

The three first Verses are plain; as for the fourth I believe it to be
the Language of the Antipodes, for I think no man can understand it.


XXXVIII.

    French.

    L’Aisné Roial sur coursier voltigeant,
    Picquer viendra si rudement courir,
    Gueule lipée, pied dans l’Estrein pleignant,
    Traine, tiré, horriblement mourir.

    English.

    The eldest Royal prancing upon a Horse,
    Shall spur, and run very fiercely
    Open mouth, the foot in the Stirrup, complaining,
    Drawn, pulled, die horribly.

ANNOT.

This foretelleth of the eldest Son of a King, who prancing upon his
Horse, shall Spur and run so fiercely, that his foot being intangled in
the Stirrup he shall be dragged and pulled, and die a fearful death.

In the year 1555. upon the 25 of May, this came to pass in the person
of Henry of Albret, the second of that name, King of Navarre.

This Prince Henry II. the eldest Royal riding upon a horse did spur him
so hard, that he ran away with him, so that he perceiving the danger he
was in, pulled the Bridle so hard that the horse’s mouth was broken; the
pain did not stop the horse, but contrariwise, he grew the more untoward,
that Henry fell down, and in falling one of his feet hung in the
stirrup, so that he was drawn, and died a horrid death. This I found in
the History of Naples.


XXXIX.

    French.

    Le conducteur de l’Armée Francoise,
    Cuidant perdre le principal Phalange,
    Par sus pavé de l’Avaigne & Ardoise,
    Soy parfondra par Gennes gent estrange.

    English.

    The leader of the French Army,
    Thinking to rout the chiefest Phalange,
    Upon the Pavement of Avaigne, and Slate,
    Shall sink in the ground by Gennes, a strange Nation.

ANNOT.

It seemeth that a French General, thinking to rout and overcome the
chiefest strength of his enemy, and going upon a brittle Pavement, made
of Slate, shall sink in the ground not far from Genoa, which he calleth
a strange Nation to the French.


XL.

    French.

    Dedans tonneaux hors oingts d’huile & graisse,
    Seront vingt un devant le port fermez,
    Au second guet feront par mort prouesses,
    Gaigner les portes & du quet assommez.

    English.

    With Pipes annointed without with Oyl and Grease,
    Before the harbour, one and twenty shall be shut,
    At the second Watch, by death, they shall do great feats of Arms,
    To win the Gates, and be killed by the Watch.

ANNOT.

The words and sense of this Stanza are plain.


XLI.

    French.

    Les os des pieds, & des mains enferrez,
    Par bruit maison long temps inhabitée,
    Seront par songes concavant deterrez,
    Maison salubre & sans bruit habitée.

    English.

    The bones of the feet and of the hands in shackles,
    By a noise a house shall be a long time deserted,
    By a dream the buried shall be taken out of the ground,
    The house shall be healthful, and inhabited without noise.

ANNOT.

I have found the truth of this Stanza upon the place, in my going to
Lion, it was my fortune to lye at a Town four Leagues on this side of
it, called Lapacodier, where this Story was told me to have happened
few days before.

It chanced that a Company of Foot was to lie in the Town, and distressed
for quarter, they enquired why such a house was empty, and were told
it was not inhabited by reason of a noise heard there every night. The
Captain of the Troop resolved, since he feared not the living, not to
fear the dead, and thereupon lay in the house that night, where Beds
were provided for him, and about half a Dozen of his stoutest Souldiers;
so they laid down their weapons on the Table, and began to be merry at
Cards and Dice, expecting the event. The door being fast locked, about
twelve and one they heard as though some body knockt at the door, one
of the Souldiers by the Captains command, with a Pistol in his hand,
and a Candle, opened the door, then appeared to them a Phantasm, in the
shape of an old man, loaded with Chains, that made a great noise, this
Phantasm beckened to the Captain at the Table to come to him, the Captain
also rising, beckened to the Phantasm to come to him, this lasted for a
while, till the Captain resolved to go to him, and so taking a Candle in
one hand, and a Pistol in the other, bid his Souldiers follow him hand
in hand with their Arms, then taking the Phantasm by the hand, which was
exceeding cold, he led them into the Cellar, and through many turnings,
till at last the Phantasm vanished, and the Candles went out, then were
they constrained to remain there till day light, when perceiving where
they were, and having taken notice of the Place where the Phantasm left
them, they went out, and related the story to the Townsmen; so afterwards
they digged in that place, where they found a kind of a Trunk, and the
bones of a man in it shackled, they buryed the body in a Church-yard, and
no noise was heard afterwards in that house, this came to pass about 1624.


XLII.

    French.

    Quand Innocent tiendra le lieu de Pierre,
    Le Nizaram Sicilian se verra,
    En grands honneurs, mais apres il cherra,
    Dans le bourbier d’une Civile guerre.

    English.

    When Innocent shall hold the place of Peter,
    The Sicilian Nizaram shall see himself
    In great honours, but after that he shall fall
    Into the dirt of a Civil war.

ANNOT.

Nothing can be more plain and true than this Prophecie, and those that
deny it, may also deny the light of the Sun, but to make it more evident,
we will examine it Verse by Verse.

When ~Innocent~ shall hold the place of ~Peter~; that is, when one
named Innocent shall be Pope, as he was that preceded the last.

The ~Sicilian Nizaram~ shall see himself in great honours; that is, the
Sicilian Nizarim, for Nizaram, is the Annagramme of Mazarin, letter
for letter, who was born in Sicily, shall see himself in great honours,
as he did; for he was then in his greatest splendor.

But after that he shall fall into the dirt of a Civil war; As every one
knows he did, having put in Prison the Prince of Condé, the Prince of
Conty, and the Duke of Congueiulle, can any thing be more plain, and
yet when I read this forty years ago, I took it to be ridiculous.


XLIII.

    French.

    Lutece en Mars, Senateurs en credit,
    Par une nuict Gaule sera troublée,
    Du grand Cræsus l’Horoscope predit,
    Par Saturnus, sa puissance exillée.

    English.

    Lutetia in Mars, Senators shall be in credit.
    In a night France shall be troubled,
    The Horoscope of the great Cræsus foretelleth,
    That by Saturn his power shall be put down.

ANNOT.

Lutetia in Latine is the City of Paris, after the death of Henry
IV. the Parliament of Paris began to prick up their ears, and to go
about to call the great ones to account, amongst whom was the Marquess
d’Ancre, favourite of the Queen Regent, that had gathered great
riches, and therefore is called here Cræsus, our Author saith, that
his power shall be put down by Saturnus, which must here be understood
mistically, which proved true, for by the Kings command, then Lewis
XIII. he was shot with three Pistols in the Louvre.


XLIV.

    French.

    Deux de poison saisis nouveaux Venus
    Dans la cuisine du grand Prince verser,
    Par le souillard tous deux au fait cogneus,
    Prins qui cuidoit de mort l’aisné vexer.

    English.

    Two newly come being provided with poison,
    To pour in the Kitchin of the great Prince,
    By the Cooks Boy the fact shall be known,
    And he taken, that thought by death to vex the elder.

ANNOT.

This came to pass in the time of Henry IV. who was poisoned at Melan,
by two unknown men, who were discovered by the Cooks Boy in the doing of
it, and were both taken, the History is at large in Peter Matthew his
Historiographer, which I could not insert here for the satisfaction of
the Reader; because I could not get the Book, the Reader may satisfie
himself upon the place.


Other Stanzas, taken out of twelve, under the seventh Century, out of
which eight have been rejected, because they were found in the foregoing
Centuries.


LXXIII.

    French.

    Renfort de Sieges manubis & maniples,
    Changez le sacre & passe sur le pronsne,
    Prins & captifs n’arreste les prez triples,
    Plus par fonds mis elevé, mis au Trosne.

    English.

    Recruit of Sieges, spoils and prizes,
    Corpus Christi day shall be changed, and the pronsne slighted,
    They shall be taken and made Prisoners, do not stay in the threefold
      Field,
    Moreover, one put in the bottom shall be raised to the Throne.


LXXX.

    French.

    L’Occident libre les Isles Britanniques,
    Le recogneu passer le bas, puis haut,
    Ne content triste Rebel corss. Escotiques,
    Puis rebeller par plui & par nuict chaut.

    English.

    The West shall be free, and the Brittish Islands,
    The discovered shall pass low, then high,
    Scottish Pirates shall be, who shall rebel,
    In a rainy and hot night.


LXXXII.

    French.

    La stratageme simulte sera rare,
    La Mort en voye rebelle par contrée,
    Par le retour du voyage Barbare,
    Exalteront la potestante entrée.

    English.

    The stratagem and grudge shall be scarce,
    Death shall be in a rebellious way through the Countrey,
    By the return from a Barbarian travel,
    They shall exalt the Protestant entrance.


LXXXIII.

    French.

    Vent chaut, conseil, pleurs, timidité,
    De nuict au lict assailly sans les Armes:
    D’oppression grand calamité,
    L’Epithalame converty pleurs & larmes.

    English.

    Hot wind, councel, tears, fearfulness,
    He shall be assaulted in his bed by night without Arms,
    From that oppression shall be raised a great calamity,
    The Epithalamium shall be converted into tears.

ANNOT.

The reason why I have put no Annotations to these, as I have done to
the rest, is, because according to my judgement, and that of the most
Learned, they are spurious.




TO THE READER.


Friendly Reader,

Before you Read the following Epistle, I would have you be warned of
a few things: One is, that according to my opinion, it is very obscure
and intelligible in most places, being without any just connection, and
besides the obscurity of the sense, the crabbedness of the expression is
such, that had not the importunity of the Bookseller prevailed, I would
have left it out, but considering the respect due to Antiquity, the
satisfaction we owe to curious persons, who would perhaps have thought
the Book imperfect without it, we let it go, trusting to your Candor and
Ingenuity.

                                                                 Farewell.




THE PROPHECIES OF Michael Nostradamus.

CENTURY VIII. IX. & X.

That had not been Printed before, and are in the same Edition of 1568.


TO THE

Most Invincible, most High, and most Christian King of ~France~ ~HENRY~
the Second; ~Michael Nostradamus~ his most obedient Servant and Subject,
wisheth Victory and Happiness.

By reason of that singular observation, I had O most Christian and
Victorious King, since my Face, who had been cloudy a great while, did
present it self before your immeasurable Majesty. I have been ever since
perpetually dazled, continually honouring and worshipping that day, in
which I presented my self before it, as before a singular humane Majesty;
now seeking after some occasion, whereby I might make appear the goodness
and sincerity of my heart, and extend my acquaintance towards your most
Excellent Majesty; and seeing that it was impossible for me to declare it
by effects, as well because of the darkness and obscurity of my mind, as
for the enlightning it did receive from the face of the greatest Monarch
in the World; I was a great while before I could resolve to whom I should
Dedicate these three last Centuries of my Prophecies, which make the
compleat thousand, and after I had a long time considered, I have with
a great temerity made my address to your Majesty, being no ways dainted
by it, as the grave Author Plutarch related in the Life of Lycurgus,
that seeing the offerings and gifts that were Sacrificed in the Temples
of their Heathen Gods, durst not come thither no more, least the people
should wonder at the costs and charges. Notwithstanding, seeing your
Royal Splendour joyned with an incomparable Humanity, I have made my
address to it, not as to the Kings of Persia, of whom to come near, it
was forbidden, but to a most Prudent and Wise Prince I have Dedicated
my Nocturnal and Prophetical Supputations, written rather by a natural
instinct, and Poetical furour, then by any rules of Poetry; and most
part of it written and agreeing with the Years, Months and Weeks, of the
Regions, Countreys and most part of the Towns and Cities in Europe;
touching also some thing of Africa, and of a part of Asia, by the
change of Regions that come near to those Climats, and compounded of
natural faction. But some body may answer (who hath need to blow his
Nose) the Rime to be as easie to be understood, as the intelligence of
the sence is hard and difficult, and therefore O most humane King, most
of the Prophetical Stanza’s are so difficult, that there is no way to
be found for the Interpretation of them; nevertheless being in hope of
setting down the Towns, Cities, and Regions, wherein most of those shall
happen, especially in the year 1585. and in the year 1606. beginning from
this present time, which is the 14. of March 1557. and going further to
the fulfilling of those things, which shall be in the beginning of the
seventh Millenary, according as my Astronomical Calculation, and other
Learning could reach, at which time the adversaries of Christ and of his
Church shall begin to multiply; all hath been composed and calculated in
days and hours of Election, and well disposed, and all as accurately as
was possible for me to do. And the whole Minerva libera & non invita,
Calculating almost as much of the time that is come, as of that which
is past, comprehending it in the present time, and what by the course
of the said time shall be known to happen in all Regions punctually
as it is here written, adding nothing superfluous to it, although it
be said; Quod de futuris contingentibus, non est determinata omnino
veritas. It is very true Sir, that by my natural instinct given me by
my Progenitors, I did think I could foretel any thing; but having made
an agreement between this said instinct of mine, and a long Calculation
of Art, and by a great tranquility and repose of mind, emptied my Soul
of all care and carefulness, I have foretold most part of these ex
tripode æneo, though there be many who attribute to me some things that
are no more mine, then what is nothing at all. The only Eternal God,
who is the searcher of men’s hearts, being pious, just, and merciful,
is the true Judge of it, whom I beseech to defend me from the calumny
of the wicked men, who would as willing calumniously inquire for what
reason all your ancient Progenitors Kings of France have healed the
disease called the Kings-evil, and some other Nations have cured the
biting of venomous Beasts; others have had a certain instinct to foretell
things that are to come, and of several others, too tedious to be here
inserted; notwithstanding those in whom the malignancy of the wicked
spirit shall not be suppressed by length of time; after my decease my
work shall be in more esteem, then when I was alive; nevertheless if I
should fail in the supputation of times, or could not please some, may it
please your most Imperial Majesty to forgive me, protesting before God
and his Saints, that I do not intend to insert any thing by writing in
this present Epistle, that may be contrary to the true Catholick Faith,
in conferring the Astronomical Calculation, according to my learning;
for the space of times of our Fathers that have been before us, are
such, submitting my self to the correction of the most Learned, that
the first man Adam was before Noah, about one thousand two hundred
forty two years, not computing the time according to the supputation
of the Gentiles, as Varro did, but onely according to the Sacred
Scriptures, and the weakness of my wit in my Astronomical Calculations.
After Noah and the universal Flood about a thousand and fourscore years
came Abraham, who was a supreme Astrologer, according to most mens
opinion, and did first invent the Chaldæan Letters; after that came
Moses, viz. some five hundred and fifteen or sixteen years after, and
between the time of David and Moses have passed about 570. years.
After which between the time of David and that of our Saviour and
Redeemer Jesus Christ, born of the Virgin Mary, have passed (according
to some Chronographers) a thousand three hundred and fifty years. Some
body may object, that this supputation is not true; because it differeth
from that of Eusebius. And from the time of humane redemption, to that
of the execrable seduction of the Saracens, have passed six hundred
and four and twenty years, or thereabouts. From that time hitherto,
it is easie to collect what times are past, if my supputation be not
good among all Nations; because all hath been calculated by the course
of the Cœlestial bodies, joyned with motion, infused in me at certain
loose hours, by the motion of my ancient Progenitors; but the injury
of the time (most excellent King) requireth, that such secret events
should not be manifested, but by an enigmatical Sentence, having the
only sense, and one only intelligence, without having mixed with it
any ambiguous or amphibological calculation, but rather under a Cloudy
obscurity, through a natural infusion, coming near to the Sentence of
one of the Thousand and two Prophets, that have been since the Creation
of the World, according to the supputation and punical Chronick of
Joel. Effundam spiritum meum super omnem, & carnem & prophetabunt
filli vestri & filiæ vestræ: But such a Prophecy did proceed from the
mouth of the Holy Ghost, who was the Supreme and eternal Power, which
being come with that of the Cœlestial bodies, hath caused some of them to
foretel great and wonderful things; as for my part I challenge no such
thing in this place, God forbid, I confess truly, that all cometh from
God, for which I give him thanks, honour, and praise, without having
mixed any thing of that divination, which proceedeth a Fato, but only
of that which proceedeth a Deo & Natura, and most of it joyned with
the motion and course of the Cœlestial Bodies; insomuch that seeing
as in a burning Glass, and through a Cloudy Vision, the great and sad
events, the prodigious and calamitous accidents, that shall befall the
Worshippers, first of God, and secondly, those that are Earthly propped
up, with a thousand other calamitous accidents, which shall be known
in course of time; for God will take notice of the long barrenness of
the great Dame, who afterwards shall conceive two principal Children:
But being in danger, she that shall be added to her by the temerity of
age, running a danger in the 18, and not able to go beyond the 36, shall
leave behind her three females, and he shall have two that never had any
of the same father, the differences between the three Brothers shall be
such, and then shall they be united and agreed, insomuch that the three
and four parts of Europe shall quake: by the lesser in years shall
the Christian Monarchy be upheld and augmented, Sects shall rise, and
presently be put down again, the Arabians shall be put back, Kingdoms
shall be united, and new Laws made. Concerning the other Children; the
first shall possess the furious Crowned Lions, holding their Paws upon
the Escutcheons. The second, well attended, will go so deep among the
Lions, that the second way shall be open, all trembling and furious going
down, to get upon the Pyrenæan Mountains. The ancient Monarchy shall
not be transferred, the third innundation of humane blood shall happen,
and for a good while Mars shall not be in Lent. And the Daughter
shall be given for the preservation of the Church, the Dominator of it
falling into the Pagan Forces of the new unbelievers, she shall have
two Children, one from faithfulness, and the other from unfaithfulness,
for the confirmation of the Catholick Church; and the other, who to his
confusion and late repentance, shall go about to ruine her. There shall
be three Regions by the extreme differences of the leagues, viz. the
Roman, the German, and the Spanish, who by a Military hand shall
make divers Sects, forsaking the 50 and 52 degrees of altitude, and all
those of remote Regions shall do homage to the Regions of Europe, and
of the North of 40 Degrees Altitude, who by a vain fright shall quake,
after that those of the West, South, and East shall quake because of
their power, insomuch that what shall be done, cannot be undone by
Warlike power. They shall be equal in Nature, but much different in
Faith. After this, the barren Dame of a greater power then the second,
shall be admitted by two people, by the first obstinate that had power
over the others; by the second, and by the third, that shall extend his
Circuit of the East of Europe, as far as the Hungarians, vanquished
and overcome, and by a Maritine Sail, shall make his excursions into
the Trinarrian and Adriatick Sea, by his Mirmidons, and Germany
shall fall, and the Barbarian Sect shall be wholly driven from among
the Latines. Then the great Empire of Antichrist shall begin in the
Attila, and Xerxes to come down with an innumerable multitude of
people, insomuch that the coming of the Holy Ghost, proceeding from
the 48 Degree, shall transmigrate, driving away the abomination of the
Antichrist, who made War against the Royal, who shall be the great Vicar
of I. C. and against his Church, and his Kingdom, per tempus, & in
occasione temporis, and before this shall precede a Solar Eclipse, the
most dark and obscure that was since the Creation of the World, till the
death and passion of I. C. and from him till then, and it shall be in
the Month of October, when such a great Translation shall be made, that
every body will think that the weight of the Earth, shall have lost its
natural motion, and be swallowed up in perpetual darkness. In the Spring
before and after this, shall happen extraordinary changes, mutations of
Kingdoms, and great Earth-quakes, with pullulation of the new Babylons
miserable daughter, increased by the abomination of the first Holocaust,
and shall last only 73 years and 7 Months, then from that Stock she
that had been long time barren, proceeding from the fifth Degree, who
shall renew all the Christian Church, and then shall be a great Peace,
Union and Concord, between one of the Children of the wandring and
seperated foreheads by divers Kingdoms, and such Peace shall be made,
that the Instigator and Promoter of Military function, by diversity of
Religions, shall be tied to the bottom of the deep, and the Kingdom of
the Rabious, who shall counterfeit the wise, shall be united. And the
Countreys, Towns, Cities and Provinces, that had deserted their first
ways to free themselves, captivating themselves more deeply, shall be
secretly angry at their liberty and Religion lost, and shall begin to
strike from the left, to turn to the right, restoring the holiness beaten
down long before with their former writing; so that after the great Dog,
shall come forth the biggest Mastif, who shall destroy all that was done
formerly, then Churches shall be built up again as before, the Clergy
shall be restored to its former state, and shall begin to Whore, and
Luxuriate, and to commit a Thousand Crimes. And being near unto another
desolation, when she shall be in her higher and more sublime dignity,
there shall rise powers and Military hands, who shall take away from
her the two Swords, and leave her only the Ensigns, from which by the
means of the crookedness that draweth them, the people causing it to go
straight, and not willing to submit unto them by the end opposite to
the sharp hand that toucheth the Ground, they shall provoke till that
a branch shall proceed from the barren, which shall deliver the people
of the World from that meek and voluntary slavery, putting themselves
under the protection of Mars, depriving Jupiter of all his honours
and dignities, for the free City established and seated in another
little Mesopotamia. And the chief Governour shall be thrust out of
the middle, and set in the high place of the Air, being ignorant of the
conspiracy of the Conspirators, with the second Thrasibulus, who long
before did manage this thing, then shall the impurities and abominations
be objected with great shame, and made manifest to the darknes of the
darkened light, and shall cease towards the end of the change of his
Kingdom, the chief men of the Church shall be put back from the love of
God, and many of them shall apostatise from the true faith, and from the
true Sects, the middlemost of which by her worshippers, be a little put
into ruine; the first, wholly in all Europe, and most part of Africa
undone by the third, by the means of the poor in Spirit, who by madness
elevated, shall through libidinous luxury, commit adultery. The people
will rise and maintain it, and shall drive away those that did adhere to
the Legislators, and shall seem by the Kingdoms spoiled by the Eastern
men, that God the Creator hath loosed Satan from his Infernal Prison, to
cause to be born the great Dog and Doham, who shall make so great
and abominable a fraction in the Churches, that the Red nor the White,
without Eyes and without Hands, shall not judge of it, and their power
shall be taken away from them. Then shall be a greater persecution
against the Church than ever was, and in the mean time shall be so great
a Plague, that two parts of three in the world shall fail, insomuch that
no body shall be able to know the true owners of fields and houses, and
there shall happen a total desolation unto the Clergy, and the Martial
men shall usurpe what shall come back from the City of the Sun, and
from Molita, and the Stæchades Islands, and the great Chain of that
Port shall be open, which taketh its denomination from a Sea Oxe, and a
new incursion shall be made through the Sea Coasts, willing to deliver
the Castulan Leap from the first Mahometan taking, and the assaulting
shall not altogether be in vain, and that place where the habitation of
Abraham was, shall be assaulted by those, who shall have a respect for
the Jovials. And that City of Achem, shall be encompassed and assaulted
on all sides, by a great power of Armed men; their Sea Forces shall be
weakened by the Western men, and to that Kingdom shall happen great
desolation, and the great Cities shall be depopulated, and those that
shall come in, shall be comprehended within the vengeance of the wrath of
God, and the Sepulchre held in so great veneration, shall remain a great
while open to the universal Aspect of the Heavens, Sun and Moon, and the
sacred place shall be converted into a Stable for small and great Cattle,
and put to prophane uses. O what a calamitous affliction shall be then
for women with Child, and chiefly by the principal Easterly head, being
for the most part moved by the Northern and Westerly men, vanquished and
put to death, beaten, and all the rest put to flight, and the Children he
had by many women, put in Prison, then shall be fulfilled the Prophecy
of the Kingly Prophet. Ut audiret gemitus compeditorum, ut solveret
filios interemptorum, what great oppression shall be made then upon the
Princes and Governours of Kingdoms, and especially of those that shall
live Eastward and near the Sea, and their Languages inter-mixed very
sociably. The Language of the Arabians and Latines by the African
communication, and all the Eastern Kings shall be driven away, beaten and
brought to nothing, not altogether by the means of the strength of the
Kings of the North, and by the drawing near of our age, by the means of
three secretly united, seeking for death by ambushes one against another.
And the renewing of the Triumvirate shall last seven years, while the
fame of such a sect shall be spread all the world over, and the Sacrifice
of the Holy and immaculate Host shall be upheld: And then shall the
Lords be two in number victorious in the North against the Eastern ones,
and there shall be such a great noise and Warlike tumult, that all the
East shall quake for fear of those two Brothers, not Northern Brothers.
And because, Sir, by this discourse, I put all things confusedly in
these predictions, as well concerning the event of them, as for the
account of the time which followeth, which is not at all, or very little
conformable to that I have done before, as well by Astronomical way,
as other of the sacred Scriptures which cannot erre, I could have set
down to every quatrain the time in which they shall happen, but it would
not please every body, much less the interpretation of them, till, Sir,
your Majesty hath granted me full power so to do, that my Calumniators
may have nothing to say against me. Nevertheless reckoning the years
since the Creation of the World to the Birth of Noah have passed 1506.
years, and from the Birth of Noah to the perfect building of the Ark
near the universal Flood have passed 600. years, whither solary, or
lunary, or mixed, for my part according to the Scriptures, I hold that
they were solary. And at the end of those 600. years Noah entered into
the Ark, to save himself from the Flood, which Flood was universal upon
the Earth, and lasted a year and two months; and from the end of the
Flood, to the birth of Abraham did pass the number of 295. years; and
from the birth of Abraham to that of Isaac did pass 100. years, and
from Isaac to Jacob 60. years; and from the time that he went into
Ægypt till he came out of it, did pass 130. years; and from the time
that Jacob went into Ægypt till his posterity came out of it did
pass 430. years; and from the coming out of Ægypt to the building of
Salomon’s Temple in the fourth year of his Reign did pass 480. years;
and from the building of the Temple till Jesus Christ, according to the
supputation of the Chronographers, did pass 490. years; and so by this
supputation, which I have gathered out of the Holy Scriptures, the whole
cometh to about 4173. years, eight Months more or less. But since the
time of I. C. hitherto, I leave it because of the diversity of Opinions.
And having calculated these present Prophecies according to the order
of the Chain, which containeth the revolution, and all by Astronomical
Doctrine, and according to my natural instinct, and after some time, and
in it comprehending since the time that Saturn shall turn to come in on
the 7 of the Month of April, till the 25 of August; Jupiter from
the 14 of June to the 7 of October; Mars from the 27 of April
till 22 of June; Venus from the 9 of April to the 22 of May;
Mercury from the 3 of February till the 24 of the same; afterwards
from the 1 of June till the 24 of the same; and from the 25 of
September till the 16 of October, Saturn in Capricorn, Jupiter
in Aquarius, Mars in Scorpio, Venus in Pisces, Mercury within
a Month in Capricorn, Aquarius in Pisces, Luna in Aquarius, the
Dragons head in Libra, the Tail opposite to her sign according to a
Conjunction of Jupiter and Mercury, with a quadrin Aspect of Mars
to Mercury, and the head of the Dragon shall be with a Conjunction
of Sol and Jupiter: the year shall be peacefull without Eclipse, and
in the beginning of that year shall be a greater persecution against the
Christian Church than ever was in Affrica, and it shall last till the
year 1792. at which time every body will think it a renovation of Age.
After that the Roman people shall begin to stand upright again, and to
put away some obscure darknesses, receiving some of its former light,
but not without great divisions, and continual changes. Venice after
that with great strength and power shall lift up her Wings so high, that
she will not be much inferiour to the strength of the old Rome, and
in that time great Bizantine Sails, joyned with the Ligustiques, by
the Northern help and power shall give some hinderance, whereby those
of Crete shall not keep their faith, the Arches built by the antient
Martial men, will keep company together with Neptun’s Waves. In the
Adriatick shall be a great discord, what was united shall be parted
asunder, and what was before, and is a great City, will go near to becom
a house, including the Pempotan, and the Mesopotamia of Europe to
45, and others to 41, 42, and 37. And in that time, and Countrey, the
Infernal power shall rise against the Church of I. C. with the power of
the Enemies to his Law, which shall be the second Antechrist, who shall
persecute the said Church and its Vicar by the means of the power of
Temporal Kings, who through their Ignorance shall be seduced by Tongues
more sharp than any Sword in the hands of a mad man. The said Reign
of Antichrist shall not last but till the ending of him, born by Age,
and of the other in the City of Plancus, accompanied by the Elect of
Modone, Fulcy by Ferrara, maintained by Adriatick, Liguriens,
and the proximity of the great Trinacria, and after that shall pass
over the Mount Jovis. The Gallique Ogmyon followed with such a
number, that even from afar off the Empire of the great Law, shall be
presented to him, and then, and after shall be profusedly spilled the
blood of the Innocent by the Nocent, raised on high; then by great
Floods the memory of those things contained by such Instruments, shall
receive an innumerable loss, as also shall learning towards the North by
the Divine Will, Satan bound once more, and an universal Peace shall be
among men, and the Church of I. C. shall be free from all tribulation,
although the Azosrains would fain mix among it the Honey of their
pestilent seduction, and this shall happen about the seventh Millinary;
so that the Sanctuary of I. C. shall be no more trodden down by the
unbelievers that shall come from the North, the world being near to
some conflagration, although by my supputations in my Prophecies, the
course of the time goeth much further. In the Epistle that within the
late years I have dedicated to my Son Cæsar Nostradamus, I have openly
enough declared some things, without prognosticating. But here (Sir) are
comprehended many great and wonderful events, which those that come after
us shall see. And during the said Astrological supputation, conferred
with the sacred Scripture, the persecution of the Clergy shall have its
beginning from the power of Northern Kings, joyned with the Eastern
ones; that persecution shall last Eleven years and a little less, at
which time the chief Northern King shall fail, which years being ended,
shall come in his united Southern one, who shall yet more violently
persecute the Clergy by the Apostatical seduction of one that shall
have the absolute power over the Militant Church of God: And the Holy
people of God and keeper of his Law, and all order of Religion shall be
grievously persecuted and afflicted, insomuch that the blood of the true
Ecclesiastical men shall float all over, and unto one of those horrid
Kings this praise shall be given by his followers to have spilt more
humane blood of the Innocent Clergymen, than any body can do Wine, and
the said King shall commit incredible crimes against the Church; humane
blood shall run through publick streets and Churches, as water coming
from an impetuous Rain, and the next Rivers shall be red with blood, and
by another Sea fight the Sea shall be red, insomuch that one King shall
say to another, Bellis rubuit navalibus æquor. After that in the same
year, & those that follow, shall happen the most horrid Plague, caused
by the precedent famine, and so great tribulations as ever did happen
since the first foundation of the Christian Church through all the Latine
Regions; some marks of it remaining in some Countreys of Spain. At
that time the Northern King hearing the complaint of the people of his
principal title, shall raise up so great an Army, and shall go through
the straights of his last Ancestors and Progenitors, that he will set up
all again in their first state, and the great Vicar of the Cope, shall
be restored in his former estate, but desolate and altogether forsaken,
and then shall the Sancta sanctorum be destroyed by Paganism, and
the old and New Testament be thrust out and burnt, after that shall
Antechrist be the infernal Prince, and once more for the last all the
Kingdoms of Christendom and also of the unbelievers shall quake for the
space of 25 years, and there shall be more grievous Wars and Battles, and
Towns, Cities, Castles and other buildings shall be burnt, desolate, and
destroyed with a great effusion of Vestal blood, Married Women and Widows
ravished, sucking Children dashed against the Walls of the Towns, and so
many evils shall be committed by the means of the Infernal prince Satan,
that almost the universal world shall be undone and desolate, and before
these events many unusual Birds shall cry through the Air, Huy, Huy,
and a little while after shall vanish away: And after that time shall
have lasted a good while, there shall be renewed a Kingdom of Saturn
and Golden Age. God the Creator shall say, hearing the affliction of
his people, Satan shall be put, and tied in the bottom of the deep,
and there shall begin an universal peace between God and men, and the
Ecclesiastical power shall be in its greater force, and Satan shall be
left bound for the space of a thousand years, and then shall be loosed
again. All these Figures are justly fitted by the sacred Scripture, to
the visible Cœlestial things, viz. Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars,
and others joyned with them, as more at large may be seen in some of my
Stanza’s. I would have calculated it more deeply, and compared one with
the other, but seeing (most excellent King) that some stand ready to
censure me, I shall withdraw my Pen to its Nocturnal repose. Multa etiam
O Rex potentissime præclara, & sane in brevi ventura, sed omnia in hac
tua Epistola innectere non possumus, nec volumus, sed ad intelligenda
quedam facta, horrida fata pauca libanda sunt, quamvis tanta sit in omnes
tua amplitudo & humanitas homines, deosque pietas, ut solus amplissimo
& Christianissimo regis nomine, & ad quem summa totius Religionis
authoritas deferatur, dignus esse videare. But only I shall beseech you
O most Merciful King, through your singular and prudent goodness, to
understand rather the desire of my Heart, and the earnest desire I have
to obey your most excellent Majesty, since my Eyes were so near your
Royal Splendor, than the greatness of my work can deserve or require.

                   From ~Selin~ this 27 ~June~, 1558.

                                          Faciebat ~Michael Nostradamus~,
                                          ~Salonæ Petreæ~, Provinciæ.




THE PROPHECIES OF Michael Nostradamus.

CENTURY VIII.


I.

    French.

    Pau, Nay, Loron, plus feu qu’a sang sera,
    Laude nager, fuir grands aux Surrez,
    Les Agassas entrée refusera,
    Pampon, Durance, les tiendront enserrez.

    English.

    Pau, Nay, Loron, more in fire then blood shall be,
    Lauda to swim, great ones run to the Surrez,
    The Agassas shall refuse the entry,
    Pampon, Durance shall keep them enclosed.

ANNOT.

The Prophecies of this, and of the remaining Centuries being for the
most part so obscure, as no man is able to make any sense of them, the
judicious Reader must not expect from me, what no man else can do; let
him suffice if I give him as much light as I can, and leave the rest to
his own judgement and industry.

Pau is the chief Town of the Province of Bearn, in the Kingdom of
Navarre, where Henry the IV. King of France and Navarre was born.
Nay and Loron are barbarous words, so are Surrez, Agassas and
Pampon. Durance is a River of France.


II.

    French.

    Condon & Aux, & autour de Mirande,
    Je voy du Ciel feu qui les environne,
    Sol, Mars, conjoint au Lion, puis Marmande,
    Foudre, grand guerre, mur tomber dans Garonne.

    English.

    Condon and Aux, and about Mirande,
    I see a fire from Heaven that encompasseth them,
    Sol, Mars, in conjunction with the Lion, and then Marmande,
    Lightning, great War, Wall falls into the Garonne.

ANNOT.

Condon, Aux, Mirande, and Marmande are Towns in the Province of
Guyenne and Languedoc, Garonne is the River of Bourdeaux.


III.

    French.

    Au fort Chasteau de Vigilanne & Resviers,
    Sera serré les puisnay de Nancy,
    Dedans Turin seront ards les premiers,
    Lors que de dueil Lyon sera transy.

    English.

    In the strong Castle of Vigilanne and Resviers,
    Shall be kept close the youngest son of Nancy,
    Within Turin the first shall be burnt up,
    When Lyon shall be overwhelmed with sorrow.

ANNOT.

Vigilanne and Resviere being falsly writen here, it must be set down
Veillane and Riuiere, which are two strong Castles, the first being
seated in Piemont, and the last in Burgundy.

Nancy is the chief Town of Lorrain, and Turin of Piemont, Lyon
is a famous City in France, so that the sense of this Prophecy seemeth
to be, that the youngest Son of Nancy, (that is of Lorrain) shall be
kept close Prisoner in those two Castles of Veillane and Riuiera, and
that the chief men of Turin shall be burnt, when the City of Lyon
shall be oppressed with sorrow.


IV.

    French.

    Dedans Monech le Coq sera receu,
    Le Cardinal de France apparoistra,
    Par Logarion Romain sera deceu,
    Foiblesse a l’Aigle, & force au Coq croistra.

    English.

    Within Monech the Cock shall be admitted,
    The Cardinal of France shall appear,
    By Logarion, Roman shall be deceived,
    Weakness to the Eagle, and strength to the Cock shall grow.

ANNOT.

Monech is false written here, it must be Monaco, which is a
Principality and Town in Italy by Genoa, belonging to the House of
the Grimaldi, wherein the French were admitted by the policy of
Cardinal Richelieu, during the Wars between France and Spain.

Logarion is a Barbarous name, by which he meaneth some body unknown to
us.

By the Eagle is meant the Emperour, who was very low at that time, and by
the Cock, the King of France, who was very powerful, where it is to be
observed, that by the Eagle the Emperour is always understood, because
it is his Arms, and by the Cock is meant the King of France, because a
Frenchman is called in Latine Galius, which also signifieth a Cock.


V.

    French.

    Apparoistra Temple luisant orné,
    La Lampe & Cierge a Borne & Bretueil,
    Pour la Lucerne le Canton destourné,
    Quand on verra le grand Coq au Cercueil.

    English.

    A shining adorned Temple shall appear,
    The Lamp and wax Candle at Borne and Bretueil,
    For Lucerne the Canton turned of,
    When the great Cock shall be seen in his Coffin.

ANNOT.

Borne and Bretueil are two particular places, the first is one of the
four Baronies of the River Mase, viz. Petersem, Steen, Horne,
Borne, the other is a little Town in Britany.

Lucerne is one of the Cantons of Switzerland. We have said before
what is meant by the great Cock, viz. the King of France. Let the
Reader make up the rest, according to his fancy.


VI.

    French.

    Charté fulgure a Lyon apparente,
    Luysant, print Malte, subit sera estainte,
    Sardon, Mauris traitera decevante,
    Geneve a Londres, a Coq trahison feinte.

    English.

    A thundering light at Lyons appearing,
    Bright, took Maltha, instantly shall be put out,
    Sardon shall treat Mauris deceitfully,
    To Geneva, London, and the Cock a fained treason.

ANNOT.

Maltha is an Island in the Mediterranean Sea, famous for the Knights
that inhabit it, and take their name from thence. Sardon and Mauris
are barbarous words.


VII.

    French.

    Verceil, Milan donra intelligence,
    Dedans Tycin sera faite la paye,
    Courir par Seine eau, sang, feu par Florence,
    Unique choir d’hault en bas faisant maye.

    English.

    Verceil, Milan shall give intelligence,
    In the Tycin shall the Peace be made,
    Run through Seine water, blood, fire through Florence,
    The only one shall fall from top to bottom making maye.

ANNOT.

Verceil and Milan are two Cities in Italy, the Tycin, or rather
Thesin is a River of the same Countrey; Seine is the River that
runneth at Paris. Florence is a famous City in Italy, and maye a
barbarous word, foisted up to patch up his Rime.


VIII.

    French.

    Pres de Linterne dans des tonnes fermez,
    Chivas fera pour l’Aigle la menée,
    L’Esleu cassé, luy ses ges enfermez,
    Dedans Turin rapt espouse emmenée.

    English.

    Near Linterne, enclosed within Tuns,
    Chivas shall drive the plot for the Eagle,
    The Elect cashiered, he and his men shut up,
    Within Turin, a rape, and Bride carried away.

ANNOT.

Linterne is a small Town in Italy; by Tuns are meant woodden
Vessels, such as they put Rhenish wines and others in.

Chivas is a Town in Piemont, and Turin the chief Town of the said
Countrey.


IX.

    French.

    Pendant que l’Aigle & le Coq a Savone,
    Seront unis, Mer, Levant & Hongrie,
    L’Armée a Naples, Palerme, Marque d’Ancone,
    Rome, Venise, par barbe horrible crie.

    English.

    Whilst the Eagle and the Cock at Savona,
    Shall be united, Sea, Levant, and Hungary,
    Army at Naples, Palermo, Mark of Ancona,
    Rome, Venice, cry because of a horrid beard.

ANNOT.

By the Eagle is meant the Emperour, and by the Cock the King of France;
the rest is easie.


X.

    French.

    Puanteur grande sortira de Lausane,
    Qu’on ne scaura l’origine du fait,
    L’on mettra hors toute la gent loingtaine,
    Feu veu au Ciel peuple estranger deffait.

    English.

    A great stink shall come forth out of Lausane,
    So that no body shall know the ofspring of it,
    They shall put out all the Forreiners,
    Fire seen in Heaven, a strange people defeated.

ANNOT.

Lausane is a City situated in Savoy, by the Lake of Geneva, but now
as I take it in the possession of the Switzers.


XI.

    French.

    Peuple infiny paroistre a Vicence,
    Sans force feu brusler la Basilique,
    Pres de Lunage des fait grand de Valence,
    Lors que Venise par morte prendre pique.

    English.

    Infinite deal of people shall appear at Vicence,
    Without force, fire shall burn in the Basilick,
    Near Lunage the great one of Valence shall be defeated,
    When Venice by death shall take the pique.

ANNOT.

Vicenza is a Town in Italy, under the dominion of the Venetians.
Basilick is the name of the biggest sort of Canons or pieces of
Ordinance. As for Valence there is three Cities of that name, one in
Spain, the second in France, and the third in Italy; instead of
Lunage, it must be Lignago which is a Town in Italy.


XII.

    French.

    Apparoistra aupres du Bufalore,
    L’haut & procere entré dedans Milan,
    L’Abbé de Foix avec ceux de Saint Maure,
    Feront la fourbe habillez en vilain.

    English.

    Near the Bufalore shall appear,
    The high and tall, come into Milan,
    The Abbot of Foix with those of Saint Maure,
    Shall make the trumpery being cloathed like rogues.

ANNOT.

Bufalore is a barbarous word; Foix is a Countrey in France, and St.
Maure a little Town in the said Countrey.


XIII.

    French.

    Le croisé Frere par amour effrenée,
    Fera par Praytus Bellerophon mourir,
    Classe a mil ans, la femme forcenée,
    Beu le breueage, tous deux apres perir.

    English.

    The crossed Brother through unbridled love,
    Shall cause Bellerophon to be killed by Praytus,
    Fleet to thousand years, the woman out of her wit,
    The drink being drunk, both after that, perish.

ANNOT.

Bellerophon and Praytus are two supposed and fictitious names.


XIV.

    French.

    Le grand credit, d’or, d’argent l’abundance,
    Aveuglera par Libide l’honneur,
    Cogneu sera d’adultere l’offence,
    Qui parviendra a son grand deshonneur.

    English.

    The great credit, the abundance of Gold and Silver
    Shall blind honour by lust,
    The offence of the Adulterer shall be known,
    Which shall come to his great dishonour.

ANNOT.

This is easie to be understood; for it is frequently seen, that Honour is
made blind by lust, and chiefly if that lust be propped up with credit;
and abundance of Gold and Silver.


XV.

    French.

    Vers Aquilon grands efforts par hommasse,
    Presque l’Europe, l’Univers vexer,
    Les deux Eclipses mettra en telle chassé,
    Et aux Pannons vie & mort renforcer.

    English.

    Towards the North great endeavours by a manly woman,
    To trouble Europe, and almost all the world,
    She shall put to flight the two Eclipses,
    And shall re-inforce life and death to the Pannons.

ANNOT.

By the Pannons is meant the Hungarians. The rest is easie.


XVI.

    French.

    Au lieu que Hieson fit sa nef fabriquer,
    Si grand Deluge sera & si subite,
    Qu’on n’aura lieu ne Terre sattaquer,
    L’onde monter Fesulan Olympique.

    English.

    In the place where Jason caused his Ship to be built,
    So great a Flood shall be, and so sudden,
    That there shall be neither place nor Land to save themselves,
    The Waves shall climb upon the Olympick Fesulan.

ANNOT.

Jason was Son to King Æson, who built a Ship called Argos, in which
he went to Colchos, to Conquer the Golden Fleece.

Fesulan here is to be understood of some high and eminent place, which
therefore he calleth Olympick, from Olympus a high Mountain in
Grecia. The place where Jason builded his Ship.


XVII.

    French.

    Les bien aisez subit seront desmis,
    Le monde mis par les trois freres en trouble,
    Cité Marine saisiront ennemis,
    Faim, feu, sang, peste, & de tous maux le double.

    English.

    Those that were at ease shall be put down,
    The world shall be put in trouble by three Brothers,
    The Maritine City shall be seized by its enemies,
    Hunger, fire, blood, plague, and the double of all evils.

ANNOT.

It is not easie to tell what them three Brothers have been, or shall be,
nor that Maritine or Sea City, therefore we leave it to the liberty of
every ones judgement, the words being plain enough.


XVIII.

    French.

    De Flore issue de sa mort sera cause,
    Un temps devant par jeusne & vieille bueyre,
    Car les trois lis luy feront telle pause,
    Par son fruit sauve comme chair crüe mueyre.

    English.

    Issued from Flora shall be the cause of her own death,
    One time before, through fasting and old drink,
    For the three Lillies shall make her such a pause,
    Saved by her fruit, as raw flesh dead.

ANNOT.

This is one of those, wherein the Author would not be understood, and may
be did not understand himself.


XVIX.

    French.

    A soustenir la grand cappe troublée,
    Pour l’esclaireir les rouges marcheront,
    De mort famille sera presqu’accablée,
    Les rouges rouges, le rouge assommeront.

    English.

    To maintain up the great troubled Cloak,
    The red ones shall march for to clear it,
    A family shall be almost crushed to death,
    The red, the red, shall knock down the red one.

ANNOT.

This seemeth to carry no other sense than a conspiracy of the Cardinals,
called here by the name of the Red, the Red against the Pope, who is
called the Red one.


XX.

    French.

    Le faux message par election feinte,
    Courir par Urbem rompue pache arreste,
    Voix acheptées de sang chappelle teinte,
    Et a un autre qui l’Empire conteste.

    English.

    The contract broken, stoppeth the message,
    From going about the Town, by a fained election,
    Voices shall be bought, and a Chappel died with blood,
    By another, who challengeth the Empire.

ANNOT.

This was so falsely printed, and so preposterously set in order, that I
had much ado to pick out this little sense of it, which amounteth to no
more, than that by reason of an agreement broken, the Messenger, that
went to publish a faigned election (it seemeth of the Empire) shall be
hindred, and that one of the Competitors to the said Empire, shall be
killed in or near a Chappel, that shall be soiled by his Blood.


XXI.

    French.

    Au port de Agde trois fustes entreront,
    Portant infection avec soy, pestilence,
    Passant le pont mil milles embleront,
    Et le pont rompre a tierce resistance.

    English.

    Three Galleys shall come into the harbour of Agde,
    Carrying with them infection and Pestilence,
    Going beyond the Bridge, they shall carry away thousands,
    At the third resistance the Bridge shall be broken.

ANNOT.

Agde is a Sea Town in France upon the Mediterranean Sea, which is
threatned here of three Galleys, that shall come into the Harbour of
it, and shall bring with them infection and Plague; and besides carry
away thousands of Captives, by which it seemeth, that these should be
Turkish Galleys, till at last upon the third resistance of the Townsmen
the Bridge shall be broken.


XXII.

    French.

    Gorsan, Narbonne, par le Sel advertir,
    Tucham, la Grace Perpignan trahie,
    La ville rouge ny voudra consentir,
    Par haute Voldrap, Gris vie faillie.

    English.

    Gorsan, Narbonne, by the Salt shall give notice,
    To Tucham, the Grace Perpignan betrayed,
    The red Town will not give consent to it,
    By high Woldrap, Gray, life ended.

ANNOT.

This is another, wherein my best skill faileth me; for take away
Narbonne, which is a City of France, in the Province of Languedoc,
and Perpignan, which is another in the County of Roussilon near
Spain. The rest are either barbarous words or nonsensical to me.


XXIII.

    French.

    Lettres trouvées de la Reyne les Coffres,
    Point de subscrit, sans aucun nom d’Autheur,
    Par la police seront cachez les offres,
    Qu’on ne scaura qui sera lamateur.

    English.

    Letters found in the Queens Coffers,
    No superscription, no name of the Author,
    By policy shall be concealed the offers,
    So that no body shall know who shall be the lover.

ANNOT.

This needeth no great explication, being pretty plain, and foretelleth
only that a Queens Trunks shall be opened, wherein many love Letters
shall be found without subscription, with many great offers, which by
policy being suppressed, or no notice taken of. The lover was never known.


XXIV.

    French.

    Le Lieutenant a l’entrée l’huis,
    Assommera le grand de Perpignan,
    En se cuidant sauver a Montpertuis,
    Sera deceu Bastard de Lusignan.

    English.

    The Lieutenant shall at the doors entry.
    Knock down the great one of Perpignan:
    And the Bastard of Lusignan shall be deceived,
    Thinking to save himself at Montpertuis.

ANNOT.

The words and the sense are clear, though the meaning is hard to be
understood.


XXV.

    French.

    Cœur de l’Amant ouvert d’amour furtive,
    Dans le ruisseau sera ravir la Dame,
    Le demy mal contrefaira lascive,
    Le Pere a deux privera corps de l’Ame.

    English.

    The Lovers heart being by a stoln love,
    Shall cause the Dame to be ravished in the Brook,
    The lascivious shall counterfeit half a discontent,
    The Father shall deprive the bodies of both of their souls.

ANNOT.

This signifieth nothing but a Lover, who meeting in or by a Brook, his
Mistress shall enjoy her, for which she shall fain a little discontent,
as if she had been ravished against her will, but her jealous Father not
contented therewith, shall kill them both, which is an ordinary Italian
trick.


XXVI.

    French.

    De Carones trouvez en Barcelonne,
    Mys descouvers, lieu terrouers & ruine,
    Le grand qui tient ne voudra Pampelone,
    Par l’Abbaye de Montferrat bruine.

    English.

    The Carones fond in Barcelona,
    Put discovered, place soil and ruine,
    The great that hold will not Pampelona,
    By the Abbaye of Montferrat, mist.

ANNOT.

Barcelona is a Town of a Province in Spain, called Catalonia.
Pampelona is the chief Town of the Kingdom of Navarre. Montferrat
is an Abbaye in the Mountains of Catalonia; the rest is insignificant.


XXVII.

    French.

    La voye Auxelle l’un sur l’autre fornix,
    Du muy de fer hors mis brave & genest,
    L’Escrit d’Empereur la Phœnix,
    Veu en celuy ce qu’a nul autre nest.

    English.

    The way Auxelle, one Arch upon another,
    Being brave and gallant put out of the Iron vessel,
    The writing of the Emperour the Phœnix,
    In it shall be seen, what no where else is.

ANNOT.

I can find nothing in this worth interpretation.


XXVIII.

    French.

    Les Simulachres d’or & d’argent enflez,
    Qu’apres le rapt, Lac au feu furent jettez,
    Au descouvert estaints tous & troublez,
    Au Marbre escripts, prescripts interjettez.

    English.

    The Images sweld with Gold and Silver,
    Which after the rape were thrown into the Lake and fire,
    Being discovered after the putting out of the fire,
    Shall be written in Marble, prescripts being intermixed.

ANNOT.

It seemeth that this gold and silver Idols having been stoln, were
afterwards thrown into a Lake and a fire, which fire being put out, those
Idols were found, and the memorial engraven in Marble.


XXIX.

    French.

    Au quart pilier ou l’on sacre a Saturne,
    Par tremblant Terre & Deluge fendu,
    Soubs l’edifice Saturnin trouvée Urne,
    D’or Capion, ravy puis tost rendu.

    English.

    At the fourth Pillar where they sacrifice to Saturn,
    Cloven by an Earth-quake and a Flood,
    An Urne shall be found under that Saturnian building,
    Full of Capion gold stoln, and then restored.

ANNOT.

This foretelleth, that at the fourth Pillar of a Temple that was
dedicated to Saturn, which Pillar shall be split by an Earth-quake
and a Flood, there shall be found an Urne, (which is an Earthen Vessel,
wherein the ancient Romans used to keep the ashes of their dead
friends) full of gold, that shall be carried away, and then restored.


XXX.

    French.

    Dedans Tholose non loin de Beluzer,
    Faisant un puis loing Palais d’espectacle,
    Thresor trouvé un chacun ira vexer,
    Et en deux locs tout aupres des Vesacle.

    English.

    Within Tholose not far from Beluzer,
    Digging a Well, for the Pallace of spectacle,
    A treasure found that shall vex every one,
    In two parcels, in, and near the Basacle.

ANNOT.

Tholose is the chief City of Languedoc, Beluzer is a private place
within its precinct, Spectacle is insignificant, and is onely foisted in,
to Rime with Basacle, which is a place in Tholose, where there is
aboundance of Water-mills, that make a hideous and fearful noise.


XXXI.

    French.

    Premier grand fruit le Prince de Pesquiere,
    Mais puis viendra bien & cruel malin,
    Dedans Venise perdra sa gloire fiere,
    Et mis a mal par plus joyve Celin.

    English.

    The first great fruit the Prince of Pesquiere,
    But he shall become very cruel and malicious,
    He shall loose his fierce pride in Venice,
    And shall be put to evil by the younger Celin.

ANNOT.

Pescaire is a Town in the Kingdom of Naples, belonging to the noble
Spanish Family of Avalos, of which it seemeth one shall prove cruel
and malicious; but he shall be killed in Venice by one young Celin,
by which formerly, and in other places the Author understandeth the
Turk.


XXXII.

    French.

    Garde toy Roy Gaulois de ton Nepveu,
    Qui fera tant que ton unique filz,
    Sera meurtry a Venus faisant vœu,
    Accompagné de nuit que trois & six.

    English.

    Take heed O French King of thy Nephew,
    Who shall cause that thine only Son
    Shall be murdered making a vow to Venus,
    Accompanied with three and six.

ANNOT.

This is a plain warning to a French King to beware of his Nephew, who
accompanied with nine others, shall cause his Son to be murdered when he
went about some venereal employment.


XXXIII.

    French.

    Le grand naistra de Verone & Vicence,
    Qui portera un surnom bien indigne,
    Qui a Venise voudra faire vengeance,
    Luy mesme prins homme du guet & signe.

    English.

    The great one of Verona and Vicenza shall be born,
    Who shall bear a very unworthy surname,
    Who shall endeavour at Venice to avenge himself,
    But he shall be taken by a Watch-man.

ANNOT.

Verona and Vicenza are two famous Cities in Italy, under the
dominion of the Venetians; the rest is easie.


XXXIV.

    French.

    Apres victoire du Lion au Lion,
    Sur la Montagne de Jura Secatombe,
    Delues, & Brodes septiesme milion,
    Lyon Ulme a Mausol mort & tombe.

    English.

    After the Victory of the Lion against the Lion,
    Upon the Mountain Jura Secatomb,
    Delues, and Brodes the seventh Million,
    Lyons, Ulme fall dead at Mausol.

ANNOT.

The Mount Jura is in Switzerland; Lyon is a great City in France;
and Ulme another in Germany; the rest is either barbarous or
insignificant.


XXXV.

    French.

    Dedans l’entree de Garonne & Blaye,
    Et la Forest non loing de Damazan,
    De Marsaves gelées, puis gresle & Bize,
    Dordonois gelé par erreur de Mezan.

    English.

    Within the entrance of Garonne and Blaye,
    And the Forrest not far from Damazan,
    Of Marsaves frosts, then Hail and North wind,
    Dordonois frozen by the error of Mezan.

ANNOT.

Garonne is the River that runneth at Bourdeaux, and Blaye is the
Port Town that lieth at the mouth of it; I should think that instead
of Dordonois, it should be Printed Dordone, which is another River
thereabouts, and is here threatned to be frozen.


XXXVI.

    French.

    Sera commis contre Oinde a Duché
    De Saulne, & Saint Aubin, & Belœuvre,
    Paver de Marbre, de tours loing pluche,
    Non Bleteran resister & chef d’œuvre.

    English.

    A Dukedom shall be committed against Oinde,
    Of Saulne, and Saint Aubin, and Belœuvre,
    To pave with Marble, and of Towers well pickt,
    Not Bleteran to resist, and master-piece.

ANNOT.

I confess my Ignorance, and should be glad that a better Oedipus than I
would undertake this.


XXXVII.

    French.

    La forteresse aupres de la Thamise,
    Cherra par lors, le Roy dedans serré,
    Aupres du pont sera veu en chemise,
    Un devant mort, puis dans le fort barré.

    English.

    The strong Fort near the Thames
    Shall fall then, the King that was kept within,
    Shall be seen near the Bridge in his Shirt,
    One dead before, then in the Fort kept close.

ANNOT.

The Dream be to them that hate thee, and the Interpretation thereof to
thine Enemies, Dan. 4, v. 10.


XXXVIII.

    French.

    Le Roy de Blois dans Avignon regner,
    Un autrefois le peuple emonopole,
    Dedans le Rhosne par murs fera baigner,
    Jusques a cinq, le dernier pres de Nole.

    English.

    The King of Blois in Avignon shall Reign
    Another time the people do murmur,
    He shall cause in the Rhosne to be bathed through the Walls,
    As many as five, the last shall be near Nole.

ANNOT.

This foretelleth that a King of France shall take Avignon, which is
a City in France belonging to the Pope. And that some of the people
beginning to murmur and mutiny, he shall cause five of them to be thrown
over the Walls into the Rhosne, which is a swift River that passeth by.
Nole must be some place thereabouts.


XXXIX.

    French.

    Qu’aura esté par Prince Bizantin,
    Sera tollu par Prince de Tholose,
    La foy de Foix, par le chef Tholentin,
    Luy faillira ne refusant l’espouse.

    English.

    What shall have been by a Bizantin Prince,
    Shall be taken away by the Prince of Tholose,
    The faith of Foix by the chief Tholentin,
    Shall fail him, not refusing the Spouse.

ANNOT.

I can understand nothing else by Prince Bizantin, but some Prince of
the house of Gonzague, who derive their pedigree from that of the
Palæologues, formerly Emperours of Constantinople, called in ancient
time Bizantium. As for the Prince of Tholose, there having been none
this two or three hundred years since that Country was devolved to the
Crown of France; but the King himself, I suppose he must be understood
here; so that the sense of this Prophecie, (if any be) is, that the King
of France shall take something from the Duke of Mantua, who is the
head of the Gonzagues, as he hath done formerly several times.

By the faith of Foix, is understood the late Duke of Rohan, who
descended from the house of Foix, and who did war against the said
Duke of Mantua at that time, when the King of France, Lewis XIII.
would not suffer his Brother the Duke of Orleans to Marry the Princess
Mary, Daughter of the Duke of Nevers, of the house of Gonzague, and
lately Queen of Poland.


XL.

    French.

    Le sang du juste par Taur & la Dorade,
    Pour se vanger contre les Saturnins,
    Au nouveau Lac plongeront la Mainade,
    Puis marcheront contre les Albanins.

    English.

    The blood of the just by Taur and Dorade,
    To avenge themselves against the Saturnins,
    In the new Lake shall sink the Mainade,
    Then shall go forth against the Albanins.

ANNOT.

Here the Author hath kept his mind to himself, as for my part, being
ignorant of his barbarous words, I had rather leave the sense of this
to the judgment of the Reader, than by an incongruous and far fetched
interpretation make my self ridiculous.


XLI.

    French.

    Esleu sera Renard ne sonnant mot,
    Faisant le Saint public, vivant pain d’orge,
    Tyranniser apres tant a un cop,
    Mettant le pied des plus grands sur la gorge.

    English.

    A Fox shall be elected that said nothing,
    Making a publick Saint, living with Barley bread,
    Shall tyrannise after upon a sudden,
    And put his foot upon the Throat of the greatest.

ANNOT.

This Prophecy seemeth to regard particularly the Pope, who having played
the Hypocrite before his Election, eating nothing but Barley bread, that
he might be reputed a Spaint, shall after his Election shall tyrannise
upon a sudden, and trample upon the Throat of the greatest Monarchs, as
they have done formerly, and would do yet if they could.


XLII.

    French.

    Par avarice, par force & violence,
    Viendra vexer les siens chefs d’Orleans,
    Prez Saint Memire assaut & resistance,
    Mort dans sa Tente, diront quil dort leans.

    English.

    By avarice, by force and violence,
    Shall come to vex his own chief of Orleans,
    Near Saint Memire assault and resistance,
    Dead in his Tent, they’l say he sleepeth there.

ANNOT.

The construction of this must be thus made. The Chiefs of Orleans,
(which is a famous Town in France) shall come to vex their own (I
suppose) Citizens. And near that place called Saint Memire, shall be a
fight, where one of those chief ones shall be killed, or die in his Tent,
and shall be denyed under pretence of being asleep.


XLIII.

    French.

    Par le decide de deux choses Bastars,
    Nepveu du sang occupera le Regne,
    Dedans Lectoure seront les coups de dards,
    Nepveu par peur pleira l’Enseigne.

    English.

    By the decision of two things, Bastards,
    Nephew of the Blood shall occupy the Kingdom,
    Within Lectoure shall be strokes of Darts,
    Nephew through fear shall fold up his Ensign.

ANNOT.

I think that instead of decision it should be division, and then the
sense is easily made up, thus; that through the division of two Bastards,
the Nephew of the Blood shall occupy the Kingdom, which Nephew afterwards
in a fight at Lectoure, (which is a strong Town in Gascony) shall be
put to the worst, and compelled to fold up his Ensigns.


XLIV.

    French.

    Le procrée naturel d’Ogmion,
    De sept a neuf du chemin destourner,
    A Roy de longue & amy au my hom,
    Doit a Navarre fort de Pau prosterner.

    English.

    The natural begotten of Ogmyon,
    From seven to nine shall put out of the way,
    To King of long, and friend to the half man,
    Ought to Navarre prostrate the fort of Pau.

ANNOT.

A man needeth a good pair of Spectacles to see through all this, what I
understand in it is that this Bastard of Ogmyon, by whom he meaneth the
King of France, ought to submit the Fort of Pau to Navarre, and
good reason too; for Navarre is the Kingdom, and Pau only the chief
Town of one Province of it, called Bearn.


XLV.

    French.

    La main escharpe & la jambe bandée,
    Louis puisné de Palais partira,
    Au mot du guet la mort sera tardée,
    Puis dans le Temple a Pasques seignera.

    English.

    The hand on a Scarf, and the leg swadled,
    The younger Lewis shall go from Palais,
    At the Watch word his death shall be protracted,
    Then afterwards at Easter he shall bleed in the Temple.

ANNOT.

The Prince of Condé, whose name was Lewis, and the youngest of the
Children of Charles of Bourbon, the first Duke of Vendosme, father
to Anthony of Bourbon, King of Navarre, went away from the Court in
the time of Francis the second King of France, and came into Bearn
to the King his Brother. He was summoned many times by Francis II. to
come to Court; but finding his name to be amongst those that intended to
surprise Lion, he durst not venture.

Nevertheless he was perswaded by his Uncle the Cardinal of Bourbon, and
came to the Court at Orleans. It is easie to believe that he fained
himself to be hurt by a fall from his Horse, or that really he was so;
having his Arm in a Scarf, and his Leg swadled up, in which posture he
came to testifie his obedience to the Kings commands.

In this posture of a wounded man, whether really and fictitiously he came
from Palais, which by mistake is printed Calais; the Printer being
ignorant, that in Bearn, where the Prince had sheltered himself, there
is a Castle called Palais, which was the place that the Prince used to
live in.

Being come to Court he was presently arrested, arraigned and condemned to
death. Nevertheless the Kings sickness proving mortal, the execution was
suspended, and his life saved. After that the Prince sought all occasions
to revenge himself, and began about Easter in April following. It
was not by an open Rebellion against the King, but under pretence to
maintain the Protestant Religion: therefore the Author saith, that this
life saved shall bleed in the Temple; because the Princes pretext was
the Temple and the Church; that is Religion. Hence the fourth Verse is
clearly understood. Resteth the third Verse, which saith, that his life
was differred till the Watch word; because the Queen seeing the King
her Son upon his death bed, caused secretly the execution of the Sentence
to be differred, that she might make use of the King of Navarre, and
of the Prince his Brothers favour, against the house of Guise, for the
obtaining of the Regency.

Moreover I observe, that in the year 1562. the Prince of Condé began
openly to rebel, surprising the City of Orleans the 29 of March,
which was Easter day that year, which sheweth the truth of the fourth
Verse.


XLVI.

    French.

    Pol Mensolée mourra trois lieues du Rhosne,
    Fuis les deux prochains Tarare destrois,
    Car Mars sera le plus horrible Throsne,
    De Coq & d’Aigle, de France frere trois.

    English.

    Paul Mensolée Shall die three Leagues from the Rhosne,
    Avoid the two straights near the Tarare;
    For Mars shall keep such a horrible throsne,
    Of Cock and Eagle, of France three Brothers.

ANNOT.

By this Pol Mensolée, he meaneth some proper name. Tarare is a great
Mountain near the City of Lions, that hath two principal ways to go
through, which here he calleth Straights; for indeed they are very
dangerous for Thieves and Murderers. The rest is but a threating of War
between the Emperour and France, when there shall be three Brothers in
France.


XLVII.

    French.

    Lac Trasmenien portera tesmoignage,
    Des conjurez ferrez dedans Perouse,
    Un Despolle contrefera le sage,
    Tuant Tedesque de Sterne & Minuse.

    English.

    Trasmenian Lake shall bear witness
    Of the Conspirators shut up in Perugia,
    A Despolle shall counterfeit the wise,
    Killing Tedesque of Sterne and Minuse.

ANNOT.

I think that the Impression is false here; for instead of Despolle,
which is a barbarous word, and signifieth nothing, I would have it in
French Despoville, in English robbed of all; so that Trasmenian
Lake is that Lake in Italy not far from the Town of Perugia, where
Hannibal gave that notable overthrow to the Romans, and killed above
20000. of them, with their consul Flaminius.

That man whom he calleth here robbed of all, shall kill some Germans;
for Tudesco in Italian, is a German, the two last words are
barbarous.


XLVIII.

    French.

    Saturne en Cancer, Jupiter avec Mars,
    Dedans Fevrier Caldondon, Salvaterre,
    Sault, Castalan, assailly des trois parts,
    Pres de Verbiesque, conflict mortelle guerre.

    English.

    Saturn in Cancer, Jupiter with Mars,
    In February Caldondon, Salvaterre,
    Sault, Castalon, assaulted on three sides,
    Near Verbiesque, fight and mortal War.

ANNOT.

The multiplicity of barbarous and insignificant words, makes this
incapable of any construction, if any body will exercise his wit
thereupon, I shall willingly lend him my ear.


XLIX.

    French.

    Satur au Bœuf, Jove en l’Eau, Mars en fleche,
    Six de Fevrier mortalité donra,
    Ceux de Tardaigne a Bruges si grand breche
    Qu’a Ponterose chef Barbarin mourra.

    English.

    Satur in Ox, Jupiter in water, Mars in arrow,
    The sixth of February shall give mortality,
    Those of Tardaigne shall make in Bruges so great a breach,
    That the chief Barbarin shall die at Pontrose.

ANNOT.

Satur in Ox; that is, Saturn in Taurus, Jupiter in Water; that
is, Jupiter in Aquarius; Mars in arrow, is Mars in Sagitarius;
when these things shall happen. The sixth day of ~February~ shall bring
a great mortality. Tardaigne is a fictitious name, unless he intended
Sardaigne. Bruges is a Town in Flander, Ponterose is some
place, where he saith, that the chief Barbarin shall die, the chief
Barbare was the Pope Urban the eighth; but because I do not know the
particularities of his death, and the place of it, I cannot make the rest
good.


L.

    French.

    La Pestilence lentour de Capadille,
    Un autre faim pres de Sagunt sapreste,
    La Chevalier Bastard de bon senille,
    Au grand de Thunes fera trancher la teste.

    English.

    The Plague shall be round about Capadille,
    Another famine cometh near to that of Sagunce,
    The Knight Bastard of the good old man,
    Shall cause the great one of Tunis to be beheaded.

ANNOT.

The difficulty here, is what is meant by that word Cappadille, for my
part I think he meaneth Italy, for some times the Italians use by way
of admiration to say Capoli, or Capadillo. Sagunce is a Town in
Spain, which for the love of the Carthaginians withstood the Romans
a great while, till they were brought to an extremity of famine, and then
set fire in their Town.


LI.

    French.

    Le Bizantin faisant oblation,
    Apres avoir Cordube a soy reprinse,
    Son chemin long, repos, pamplation,
    Mer passant proye par la Cologne a prinse.

    English.

    The Bizantin, making an offering,
    After he hath taken Cordua to himself again,
    His way long, rest, contemplation,
    Crossing the Sea hath taken a prey by Cologne.

ANNOT.

This is an express delineation of Charles the V. Empire, who at the
latter end of his days retired into a Monastery, reserving unto himself
for his subsistance the revenue of the Kingdom of Castille, expressed
here by Cordua, which is a City of Spain.


LII.

    French.

    Le Roy de Blois dans Avignon Regner,
    D’Amboise & Seme viendra le long de Lindre.
    Ongle a Poitiers Saintes aisles ruiner,
    Devant Bony.

    English.

    The King of Blois shall Reign in Avignon,
    He shall come from Amboise and Seme, along the Linder,
    A Nail at Poitiers shall ruine the Holy Wings,
    Before Bony.

ANNOT.

The first Verse and the interpretation is easie.

Amboise is a Town in France upon the River of Loire.

The two last Verses being inperfect, admits of no interpretation, onely
to let the Reader know that Poitiers is a very great City in France,
and Capital of the Province of Poitou.


LIII.

    French.

    Dedans Boulogne voudra laver ses fautes,
    Il ne poura au Temple du Soleil,
    Il volera faisant choses si hautes,
    En Hierarchie n’en fut onc un pareil.

    English.

    He shall desire to wash his faultes in Bulloin,
    In the Church of the Sun, but he shall not be able,
    He shall fly doing so high things,
    That the like was never in Hierarchy.

ANNOT.

There is two Towns called Bolloin, one is in Italy, the other in
France, the last is that which is meant here; for Cardinal Richelieu
who is the man that did so high things, and the like of which was never
in Hierarchy (that is in the Clergy) a little afore his death had vowed
if he recovered his health to go in Pilgrimage to Bulloin, where there
is a famous Temple for Miracles, (as they say) dedicated to our Lady,
which is called here the Sun, by an allusion to that passage of the
Revelation: And there appeared a Woman cloathed with the Sun; but the
said Cardinal was prevented by death.


LIV.

    French.

    Soubs la couleur du traité mariage,
    Fait magnanime par grand Chiren Selin,
    Quintin, Arras, recouvrez au voiage,
    D’Espagnols fait second banc Macelin.

    English.

    Under pretence of a Treaty of Marriage,
    A Magnanimous act shall be done by the great Cheiren Selin,
    Quintin, Arras recovered in the journey,
    Of Spaniards shall be made a second Macelin Bench.

ANNOT.

This is a Prognostication concerning a King of France, meant here by
the great Cheiren Selin, who under pretence of a Treaty of Marriage,
shall recover in his journey these two Towns Saint Quintin and Arras,
for the Shambles are called in Latine Macellum. Quod ibi mactentur
pectora quæ mercatoribus venundantur.


LV.

    French.

    Entre deux Fleuves se verra enserré,
    Tonneaux & caques unis a passer outre,
    Huit Pont rompus chef a tant enferré,
    Enfans parfaits sont jugulez en coultre.

    English.

    Between two Rivers he shall find himself shut up,
    Tuns and Barrels put together to pass over,
    Eight Bridges broken, the chief at last in Prison,
    Compleat children shall have their throat cut.

ANNOT.

It is an accident that hath often happened to a Commander of an Army,
to find himself either by his own oversight, or by the policy of his
enemies, shut up between two Rivers, having upon neither of them a Bridge
at his command; as it did happen once to the Prince of Condé, the
Grandfather of this, in the time of the Civil war for Religion, who was
forced by it to dissolve his Army, and bid every one shift for himself,
so that they almost all escaped by several small parties, some going one
way some another, at such time it is an ordinary shift to make use of
empty Vessels and Caskes to make a Bridge, as our Author doth mention
here.


LVI.

    French.

    La bande foible la Terre occupera,
    Ceux du haut lieu feront horribles cris,
    Le gros troupeau d’estre coin troublera,
    Tombe pres D. nebro descouvert les escrits.

    English.

    The weak party shall occupy the ground,
    Those of the high places shall make fearful cries,
    It shall trouble the great flock in the right corner,
    He falleth near D. nebro discovereth the writings.

ANNOT.

I dare not comment upon this, for fear it should be said of me, what was
said of the Glose of Accurtius; obscura per obscurius.


LVII.

    French.

    De Soldat simple parviendra en Empire,
    De Robe courte parviendra a la longue,
    Vaillant aux Armes, en Eglise ou plus pire,
    Vexer les Prestres comme l’eau fait l’esponge.

    English.

    From a simple Souldier he shall come to have the supreme command,
    From a short Gown he shall come to the long one,
    Vaillant in Arms, no worse man in the Church,
    He shall vex the Priests, as water doth a Spunge.

ANNOT.

I never knew nor heard of any body to whom this Stanza might be better
applied, then to the late Usurper Cromwel, for from a simple Souldier,
he became to be Lord Protector, and from a Student in the University he
became a graduate in Oxford, he was valliant in Arms, and the worse
Churchman that could be found; as for vexing the Priests, I mean the
Prelatical Clergy, I believe none went beyond him.


LVIII.

    French.

    Regne en querelle aux freres divisé,
    Prendre les Armes & les nom Britannique,
    Tiltre Anglican sera tard advisé,
    Surprins de nuit, mener a l’air Gallique.

    English.

    A Kingdom in dispute, and divided between the Brothers,
    To take the Arms and the Britannick name,
    And the English title, he shall advise himself late,
    Surprised in the night and carried into the French air.

ANNOT.

This prognosticateth a great division in England between Brothers,
about the Title and Kingdom of England, insomuch, that in conclusion
one shall be surprised by night, and carried away into France.


LIX.

    French.

    Par deux fois haut, par deux fois mis a bas,
    L’Orient aussi l’Occident foiblira,
    Son adversaire apres plusieurs combats,
    Par Mer chassé au besoin faillira.

    English.

    Twice set up high, and twice brought down,
    The East also the West shall weaken,
    His adversary after many fights,
    Expelled by Sea, shall fail in need.

ANNOT.

This foretelleth of some considerable person, who shall be twice set up,
and brought down again. The second Verse is pronounced after the manner
of the old Oracles, as

    Aio te Æacida Romanos vincere posse,

For no body can tell here whither the East shall weaken the West, or
otherways. The last two Verses are easie.


LX.

    French.

    Premier en Gaule, premier en Romanie,
    Par Mer & Terre aux Anglois & Paris,
    Merveilleux faits par cette grand mesgnie,
    Violant, Terax perdra le Norlaris.

    English.

    The first in France, the first in Romania,
    By Sea and Land to the English and Paris,
    Wonderful deeds by that great company,
    By ravishing, Terax shall spoil the Norlaris.

ANNOT.

The first in France is the King, the first in Romania is the Pope,
who it seemeth shall joyn together by Sea and Land, and come against
Paris, who shall call the English to its help, insomuch, that strange
deeds shall be done by that great company. As for Terax, it seemeth to
be the proper name of some man, who by ravishing a woman called here the
Norlaris, shall spoil her and cause sad consequences. Norlaris by
transposition of Letters is Lorrain.


LXI.

    French.

    Jamais par le decouvrement du jour,
    Ne parviendra au signe Sceptrifere,
    Que tous Sieges ne soient en sejour,
    Portant au Coq don du Tag a misere.

    English.

    Never by the discovering of the day,
    He shall attain to the Sceptriferous sign,
    Till all his seats be settled,
    Carrying to the Cock a gift from the Tag to misery.

ANNOT.

This signifieth that one pretending to a Kingdom, shall never attain to
it by often removing his place, until all his seats be settled, that is,
untill his wandring be ceased. And a gift brought by him to the King of
France from Portugal, signified here by the Tag, which is the River
of Lisbon the Capital City of it, from which gift shall proceed misery.


LXII.

    French.

    Lors qu’on verra expiler le Saint Temple,
    Plus grand du Rhosne, & sacres prophaner:
    Par eux naistra pestilence si grande,
    Roy fait injuste ne sera condamner.

    English.

    When one shall see spoiled the Holy Temple,
    The greatest of the Rhosne, and sacred things prophaned,
    from them shall come so great a pestilence,
    That the King being unjust shall not condemn them.

ANNOT.

The greatest Temple of the Rhosne, is that of the City of Lion,
which is seated upon that River of Rhosne, which when it shall be
robbed and spoiled, then shall come a horrid Pestilence, which our Author
attributeth to the injustice of the King then Reigning, who shall neglect
to punish those Sacriledges.


LXIII.

    French.

    Quand l’adultere blessé sans coup aura,
    Meurdry la femme & le fils par depit,
    Femme assomée l’Enfant estranglera,
    Huit captifs prins sestoufer sans respit.

    English.

    When the Adulterer wounded without a blow,
    Shall have murdered the wife and son by spight,
    The woman knocked down, shall strangle the child,
    Eight taken prisoners, and stifled without tarrying.

ANNOT.

This is the description of a sad Tragedy, which to understand, you must
joyn all the Verses together, and make it one sense. The Adulterer
wounded without a blow, is one that shall get a disease, (suppose the
Pox) his wife finding fault with it, he shall murder her, and her
Son; she not being quite dead shall strangle another Child (which it
seemeth she had by this Adulterer) and for this fact eight shall be taken
prisoners and immediately hanged, by which you must suppose the fact to
be done in France, for there they Judge and Hang immediately, whereby
in England they must stay till Sessions-time.


LXIV.

    French.

    Dedans les Isles les enfans transportez,
    Les deux de sept seront en desespoir,
    Ceux de terrouer en seront supportez,
    Nompelle prins, des ligues fuy l’espoir.

    English.

    In the Islands the Children shall be transported,
    The two of seven shall be in despair,
    Those of the Countrey shall be supported by,
    Nompelle taken, avoid the hope of the League.

ANNOT.

This seemeth to have a great relation to our late unhappy troubles in
England, when the Princess Elizabeth and the Duke of Glocester
were transported into the Isle of Wight, which are the two of the
seven, (for the Queen hath had seven children) and the Kings Majesty and
his Highness the Duke of York, were driven into the Low-Countreis,
being in a manner in dispair of ever coming again, and those Countreys
were much the better for the harbouring of them; in the last Verse by
Nompelle I understand Anagrammatically Monpelier, which being taken,
there is no more hope in the League, as it did happen in the time of
Henry the IV. King of France, who never saw the League or Covenant
quite routed, till that Town was taken; for it is familiar enough to
those kind of Prophets to make an ὕστερον πρώτερον, and joyn things past,
to those that are to come, to darken the Readers understanding, and as
the Scripture saith, Ut videntes non videant.


LXV.

    French.

    Le vieux frustré du principal espoir,
    Il parviendra au chef de son Empire,
    Vingt mois tiendra le Regne a grand pouvoir,
    Tyran, cruel en delaissant un pire.

    English.

    The old man frustrated of his chief hope,
    He shall attain to the head of his Empire,
    Twenty months he shall keep the Kingdom with great power,
    Tyrant, cruel, and having a worse one.

ANNOT.

The words of this Prophecy are plain enough, and because I cannot learn
in History that such things have come to pass yet, therefore I reckon it
among those de futuro.


LXVI.

    French.

    Quand l’Escriture D. M. trouvée,
    Et Cave antique a Lampe descouverte,
    Loy, Roy, & Prince Vlpian esprouvée,
    Pavillon, Royne & Duc soubs la couverte.

    English.

    When the writing D. M. shall be found,
    And an ancient Cave discovered with a Lamp,
    Law, King, and Prince Ulpian tried,
    Tent, Queen and Duke under the rugge.

ANNOT.

In the year 1555. Ferdinand Alvaro of Toledo Duke of Alba, being
sent by Charles the V. into Italy to resist the French, arrived in
June at Milan, and having gathered together, all his Forces, Besieged
the Town St. Jago, but Henry II. King of France sending some
succours by the Duke of Aumale, he raised up his siege, and put his
Army into Garrisons. The Duke of Alba leaving the Field in this manner,
the Duke of Aumale besieged Vulpian, wherein were 1000. souldiers
in Garrison, under the command of Cæsar of Naples, besides the
Inhabitants. Never was a place so furiously assaulted, and so manfully
defended, so that the French were many times beaten back; but at last
after 24. days siege the Duke of Aumale did gloriously take it.

The Author foretelling the time of this victory, said it was when the
writing D. M. in big letters was found, that is to say, about the 11. of
September after the Equinox, because in the Ephemerides, the Meridional
descension of the Planets, and chiefly of Sol, Venus, and Mercury
is marked with these two Letters D. M. which descension cometh to pass
after the Equinox of Autumn towards the end of September. At the
same time was discovered an ancient Cave, wherein was found one of those
Lamps, that cannot be put out, and burns continually without any addition
of Oil, by an invention that is lost. Such another was found in the time
of Alexander the VI. and Adrian the VI.

The Town of Vulpian was at that time tried by a King and a Prince,
viz. Henry the II. and the Duke of Aumale Prince of Lorrain, and
Brother to the Cardinal of Lorrain, and to the Duke of Guise.

The Author addeth, that besides these three things, viz. the finding
of the letters D. M. The Cave discovered the siege of Vulpian; there
happened a fourth one, viz. that a Queen and a Duke should consult
together in a Summer-house, about the important affairs of the Kingdom.
To understand this, we must suppose that Pope Paul the IV. willing to
secure his own person and the Ecclesiastical State against the Spanish
faction, and that of the Colonese, did seize upon many places belonging
to the said Colonese, and knowing besides that the Spaniards being
of the Coloneses party, would not fail to come upon him, he disposed
the King of France to come to his succours, so that the Queen having a
particular confidence in the Duke of Guise, did consult with him about
this business in some Summer-house, which the French call a Pavillon.


LXVII.

    French.

    Par. Car. nersaf, a ruine grand discorde,
    Ne l’un ne l’autre n’aura election,
    Nersaf du peuple aura amour & concorde,
    Ferrare, Collonne grande protection.

    English.

    Par. Car. Nersaf, to ruine great discord,
    Neither one nor the other shall be Elected,
    Nersaf, shall have of the people love and concord,
    Ferrare, Colonna, great protection.

ANNOT.

It is very hard to say what the Author meaneth by these disjunctives
Par. Car. Nersaf, all what can be gathered by what follows, is,
that there shall be a great variance and strife about an Election, (I
suppose of a Pope as it useth to be) and that Nersaf shall have the
good will of the people, and yet none of them shall be Elected.

As for the fourth Verse, it is to be noted first that Ferrara is a
strong Town in Italy belonging to the Pope, and Colonna is the
name of the chief Family in Rome, now whether Ferrara shall be a
protection to Colonna, or Colonna to Ferrara, we leave it to the
Reader to judge, because the Verse hath a double sense.


LXVIII.

    French.

    Vieux Cardinal par le jeune deceu,
    Hors de sa charge se verra desarmé,
    Arles ne monstres double fort apperceu,
    Et l’Aqueduct & le Prince embaumé.

    English.

    An old Cardinal shall be cheated by a young one,
    And shall see himself out of his imployment,
    Arles do not show, a double fort perceived,
    And the Aqueduct, and the embalmed Prince.

ANNOT.

The two first Verses are very plain, the two last not so; therefore
observe that Arles is a City in France, in the Countrey of Dauphine
or Provence, famous for antiquity, which is forwarned here not to shew
its Fords, nor its Aqueducts, (which are buildings to convey water), nor
its embalmed Prince, which it seemeth lyeth thereabout buried. The Author
hath deprived here the Author of the reasons for why.


LXIX.

    French.

    Aupres du jeune se vieux Ange baiser,
    Et le viendra surmonter a la fin,
    Dix ans esgaux aux plus vieux rabaisser,
    De trois deux l’un huitiesme Seraphin.

    English.

    Near the young one the old Angel shall bowe,
    And shall at last overcome him,
    Ten years equal, to make the old one stoop,
    Of three, two, one, the eighth a Seraphin.

ANNOT.

This is the description of a grand Cheat, when an old man called here
Angel, shall stoop before a young one, whom he shall overcome at last,
after they have been ten years equal. The last Verse is Mistical, for
there is four numbers, three, two, one, which make six; and eight, which
he calleth Seraphin, whether by allusion to that Quire of Angels,
which some call the eight, or whether to the Order of St. Francis, who
calleth it self Seraphical, is not easie to determine.


LXX.

    French.

    Il entrera vilain, meschant, infame,
    Tyrannisant la Mesopotamie,
    Tous amis fait d’Adulterine Dame,
    Tetre horrible noir de Physiognomie.

    English.

    He shall come in villaen, wicked, infamous,
    To tyranise Mesopotamia,
    He maketh all friends by an adulteress Lady,
    Foul, horrid, black in his Physiognomie.

ANNOT.

Mesopotamia is a Greek word, signifying a Countrey between two Rivers;
and though there be many Countreys so seated, yet to this day, it
properly belongeth to that Countrey, that lyeth between the two famous
Rivers Tigris and Euphrates near Babylon; the rest is easie.


LXXI.

    French.

    Croistra le nombre si grand des Astronomes,
    Chassez bannis & livres censureq,
    L’An mil six cens & sept par sacrez glomes,
    Que nul au sacres ne seront asseurez.

    English.

    The number of Astronomers shall grow so great,
    Driven away, bannished, Books censured,
    The year one thousand six hundred and seven by sacred glomes,
    That none shall be secure in the sacred places.

ANNOT.

The sense of this is clear, viz. that about the year 1607. the number
of Astronomers shall grow very great, of which some shall be expelled
and banished, and their Books censured and suppressed: the rest is
insignificant to me.


LXXII.

    French.

    Champ Perusin O l’Enorme deffaite,
    Et le conflict tout aupres de Ravenne,
    Passage sacra lors qu’on fera la feste,
    Vaincueur vaincu, Cheval mange L’avenne.

    English.

    Perugian Field, O the excessive rout,
    And the fight about Ravenna,
    Sacred passage when the Feast shall be celebrated,
    The victorious vanquished, the Horse to eat up his Oats.

ANNOT.

Perugia is a City in Italy, and so is Ravenna, by which it
seemeth there shall be a notable Battle fought, as was once before in
the time at Lewis the XII. King of France between Gaston de Foix
his Nephew, and Don Raimond de Cardonne Vice-roy of Naples, for
there the French got the Battle; in conclusion of which, the said
Gaston de Foix pursuing a Troop of Spaniards that were retiring, was
unfortunately kill’d, and so the victorious were vanquished.


LXXIII.

    French.

    Soldat Barbare le grand Roy frapera,
    Injustement non esloigné de mort,
    L’Avare Mere du fait cause sera,
    Conjurateur & Regne en grand remort.

    English.

    A Barbarous Souldier shall strike the King,
    Unjustly, not far from death,
    The covetous Mother shall be the cause of it,
    The Conspirator and Kingdom in great remorse.

ANNOT.

These words are so plain that they need no interpretation.


LXXIV.

    French.

    En Terre neuve bien avant Roy entré,
    Pendant subjects luy viendront faire accueil,
    Sa parfidie aura tel rencontré,
    Qu’aux Citadins lieu de feste & recueil.

    English.

    A King being entered far into a new Countrey,
    Whilst his Subjects shall come to welcom him,
    His perfidiousness shall find such an encounter,
    That to the Citizens it shall be instead of feast and welcom.

ANNOT.

The sense of this seemeth to be, that a certain King being far got
into a new conquered Countrey, where he shall deal perfidiously with
his Subjects, that then he shall meet with such an accident, as to his
Citizens shall be instead of feast & welcom.


LXXV.

    French.

    Le Pere & fils seront meurtris ensemble,
    Le Prefecteur dedans son Pavillon,
    La Mere a Tours du fils ventre aura enfle,
    Cache verdure de fueilles papillon.

    English.

    The Father and Son shall be murdered together,
    The Governour shall be so in his Tent,
    At Tours the Mother shall be got with child by her son,
    Hide the greenness with leaves Butter-flye.

ANNOT.

There is nothing hard here but the last Verse, whereby it is signified,
that after such an incest of the Mother with the Son in the City of
Tours (which is a Town in France) the fruit of it shall be secretly
buryed, and green Turfs laid upon the place, and Leaves upon them, to
take away the knowledge of it.


LXXVI.

    French.

    Plus Macelin que Roy en Angleterre,
    Lieu obscur ne par force aura l’Empire,
    Lasche, sans foy, sans loy, seignera Terre,
    Son temps s’aproche si presque je souspire.

    English.

    More Macelin then King in England,
    Born in obscure place, by force shall reign,
    Of loose disposition, without faith, without Law, the ground shall
      bleed,
    His time is drawing so near that I sigh for it.

ANNOT.

Macelin, is a Butcher or cruel man, from the Latine word Macellum,
which signifieth the Shambles, it is without contradiction that by this
Prophecy is plain concerning the late tyrant Cromwel, and his unlawful
Government.


LXXVII.

    French.

    L’Antechrist bien tost trois annichilez,
    Vingt & sept ans durera sa guerre,
    Les Heretiques morts; captifs exilez,
    Sang corps humain eau rougie, gresler Terre.

    English.

    By Antichrist three shall shortly be brought to nothing,
    His War shall last seven and twenty years,
    The Hereticks dead, Prisoners banished,
    Blood, humane body, water made red, Earth hailed.

ANNOT.

What he meaneth here by Antichrist is not easie to determine, for he
cannot mean the Pope, himself being a Papist, nor the great Antichrist,
whose Reign, according to the Scripture, shall last but three years and
a half, it is more likely then that this Stanza hath coherence with the
precedent, and that by it he meaneth Henry the VIII. who for the space
of about 27 years before he dyed, did handle something roughly the Clergy
and Clergy-men.


LXXVIII.

    French.

    Un Bragamas avec la langue torte,
    Viendra des dieux rompre le Sanctuaire,
    Aux Heretiques il ouvrira la porte,
    En suscitant l’Eglise Militaire.

    English.

    A Bragamas with his crooked Tongue,
    Shall come and break the Gods Sanctuary,
    He shall open the Gates unto Hereticks,
    By raising the Militant Church.

ANNOT.

Bragamas is the same thing that we call now Bragadocio. By the Gods
Sanctuary, he meaneth the Temples of the Romish Religion, who are
reputed Sanctuaries, and are full of Images, which they worship as Gods,
praying and offering Incense to them.


LXXIX.

    French.

    Qui par fer pere perdra, nay de Nonnaire,
    De Gorgon sur la fin sera sang perferant,
    En Terre estrange fera si tout de taire,
    Qu’il bruslera luy mesme & son entant.

    English.

    He that by Iron shall destroy his Father, born in Nonnaire,
    Shall in the end carry the blood of Gorgon,
    Shall in a strange Countrey make all so silent,
    That he shall burn himself and his intent.

ANNOT.

Nonnaire and Gorgon are two barbarous words, as for the sense of that
and the rest, he that shall be able to read the words, shall be as wise
as my self.


LXXX.

    French.

    Des innocens le sang de Vefue & Vierge,
    Tant de maux faits par moiens ce grand Roge,
    Saints simulachres trempez en ardant cierge,
    De frayeur crainte ne verra nul que boge.

    English.

    The blood of the innocent Widow and Virgin,
    So many evils committed by the means of that great Rogue,
    Holy Images, dipt in burning wax Candles,
    For fear no body shall be seen to stir.

ANNOT.

What he meaneth by the great Rogue is not obvious, but the main drift of
this Stanza seemeth to be, to foretel the abuses that should be offered
to the Popish Images by the Protestant party, as it was done in the time
of the Civil Wars of France, and a little while after our Author had
written his Prophecies.

By the great Rogue, he meaneth some chief Commander of the Protestant
party, that were in those days, as the Prince of Condé, the Admiral of
Castilon, or his Brother Dandelot.


LXXXI.

    French.

    Le neuf Empire en desolation,
    Sera changé du Pole Aquilonaire,
    De la Sicile viendra l’emotion,
    Troubler l’Emprise a Philip tributaire.

    English.

    The new Empire in desolation,
    Shall be changed from the Northern Pole,
    The commotion shall come from Sicily,
    To trouble the undertaking, tributary to Philip.

ANNOT.

This threatneth the Empire that now is in Germany, of a great
desolation, and to be removed from its place, and threatneth also the
Island of Sicily of a fearful commotion, which shall trouble the
undertakings of Philip, that is, King of Spain, because they usually
are called by that name.


LXXXII.

    French.

    Ronge long, sec, faisant du bon valet,
    A la par fin n’aura que son congie,
    Poignant poison & Lettres au colet,
    Sera saisy, eschapé, en dangié.

    English.

    Long gnawer, dry, cringing and fawning,
    In conclusion shall have nothing but leave to be gone,
    Piercing poison and Letters in his Collar,
    Shall be seised, escape, and in danger.

ANNOT.

The words of this are easie to be understood, but not who should be that
man to whom he giveth these four famous Epithetes of Long-gnawer,
dry, cringing and fawning.


LXXXIII.

    French.

    Le plus grand voile hors du port de Zara,
    Pres de Bizance fera son entreprise,
    D’Ennemy perte & l’amy ne séra,
    Le tiers a deux fera grand pille & prise.

    English.

    The greatest Sail out of the Port of Zara,
    Near Bizance shall make his undertaking,
    There shall be no loss of foes or friends,
    The third shall make a great pillage upon the two.

ANNOT.

By Zara I suppose that the Venetians are meant, who have a very
strong Town of that name, situated in Dalmatia. Bizance is
Constantinople, as we have said before; now whether this Prophecy was
fulfilled when the Venetians took the Island of Tenedos, some 20
years ago, which is not far from Constantinople, or whether it is to
come, I dare not assert.


LXXXIV.

    French.

    Paterne aura de la Sicile crie,
    Tous les aprests du Gouphre de Trieste,
    Qui s’entendra jusques a la Trinacrie,
    De tant de voiles, fuy, fuy, l’horrible peste.

    English.

    Paterne shall have out of Sicily a cry,
    All the preparations of the Gulph of Trieste,
    That shall be heard as far as Trinacry,
    Of so many Sails, fly, fly, the horrid plague.

ANNOT.

It hath been impossible for me to make any sense of this, and therefore
I believe that it is falsely printed, and that instead of Paterne, it
should be Palerme, which is the chief Town in Sicily. Trinacry is
Sicily it self, so called, quod tria habeat, άκρα seu promontoria.


LXXXV.

    French.

    Entre Bayonne & a Sainct Jean de Lux,
    Sera posé de Mars la promottoire,
    Aux Hanix d’Aquilon, Nanar hostera Lux,
    Puis suffoque au lit sans adjoutoire.

    English.

    Between Bayonne and Saint John de Lux,
    Shall be put down the promoting of Mars,
    From the Hunix of the North, Nanar shall take away Lux,
    Then shall be suffocated in his bed without help.

ANNOT.

Bayonne is a Town in France, upon the frontiers of Spain, and Saint
John de Lux is the utmost frontiere of France, that way, (that being
supposed) he saith, that about Saint John de Lux, the promoting of the
war shall be set down; that is, that peace shall be made, as it was about
seven or eight years ago between France and Spain, and the Marriage
concluded between the King and the Infanta. The two last Verses are
nonsensical, and only set down to make up the rhime.


LXXXVI.

    French.

    Par Arnani, Tholose, & Villefranque,
    Bande infinie par le Mont Adrian,
    Passe Riviere, hutin par pont la planque,
    Bayonne entrer tous Bichoro criant.

    English.

    By Arnani, Tholose, and Villefranche,
    An infinite deal of people by the Aprian,
    Cross Rivers, noise upon the Bridge and plank,
    Come all into Bayonne crying Bichoro.

ANNOT.

Arnani, Tholose, and Villefranche are Towns of a Province in
France called Languedoc. Mont Adrian is a Mountain thereabout, and
Hutin is an old French word, signifying noise and strife, the sense
then of this Prophecy is, that by those Towns and Mountains, shall pass
an infinite multitude of people, with a great noise and strife, and shall
come and enter into Bayonne, every one crying in that Countrey Language
Bichoro, which is as much as to say, Victory.


LXXXVII.

    French.

    Mort conspirée viendra en plein effet,
    Charge donnée & voyage de mort,
    Esleu, crée, receus, par siens desfait,
    Sang d’innocence devant soy par remort.

    English.

    A conspired death shall come to an effect,
    Charge given, and a journey of death,
    Elected, created, received, by his own defeated,
    Blood of Innocency before him by remorse.

ANNOT.

There is no mistical sense in this, and the words are plain, although of
a crabbid construction.


LXXXVIII.

    French.

    Dans la Sardaigne un noble Roy viendra,
    Qui ne tiendra que trois ans le Royaume,
    Plusieurs couleurs avec soy conjoindra,
    Luy mesme apres soin sommeil Matrirscome.

    English.

    A noble King shall come into Sardinia,
    Who shall hold the Kingdom only three years,
    He shall joyn many Colours to his own,
    Himself afterwards, care, sleep matrirscome.

ANNOT.

Sardinia is an Island in the Mediterranean Sea, now in the possession
of the Spaniard, since he took the Kingdom of Naples, the three first
Verses are something intelligible, the last is altogether impossible and
barbarous.


LXXXIX.

    French.

    Pour ne tomber entre mains de son oncle,
    Qui ses enfans par regner trucidez,
    Orant au peuple mettant pied sur Peloncle,
    Mort & traisné entre Chevaux bardez.

    English.

    That he might not fall into the hands of his Uncle,
    That had murdered his Children for to rule,
    Taking away from the people, and putting his foot upon Peloncle,
    Dead and drawn among armed Horses.

ANNOT.

This signifieth that an Uncle shall murder his Nephews Children, that he
may Reign, and that the said Nephew shall withdraw, and save himself from
the said Uncle. The rest is altogether obscure, if not absurd.


XC.

    French.

    Quand des croisez un trouvé de sens trouble,
    En lieu du sacre verra un Bœuf cornu,
    Par vierge porc son lieu lors sera double,
    Par Roy plus ordre ne sera soustenu.

    English.

    When of the crossed, one of a troubled mind,
    In a sacred place shall see a horny Oxe,
    By Virgin Pork then shall his place be double,
    By King no henceforth, order shall be maintained.

ANNOT.

By the crossed is understood some order of Knight-hood, who for the most
part wear that Badge, one of which being mad, and seeing in a Church a
Horny Oxe come, by a Virgin Hog shall be kept from harm, or rescued by a
Hog or Sow that was a Virgin, and it seems crossed the said Oxe, that he
should not gore the Knight, that then such order of Knighthood shall be
no more maintained nor upheld by the King of that Countrey, wherein such
thing shall happen.


XCI.

    French.

    Parmy les Champs des Rhodanes entrées,
    Ou les croisez seront presques unis,
    Les deux Brassiers en Pisces rencontrées,
    Et un grand nombre par Deluge punis.

    English.

    Through the Fields of the Rhodanes comings in,
    Where the crossed shall be almost united,
    The two Brassiers met in Pisces,
    And a great number punished by a Flood.

ANNOT.

Rhodanus in Latine is the River of Rhosne, which cometh from
Switzerland, and passing through the Lake of Geneva, runneth to
Lyon, it seemeth then that in those Fields that are about that River
there, will be a fearful inundation, when the Brassiers (or rather
Croziers, which is a constellation so called) shall meet in Pisces,
which is one of the twelve Signs of the Zodiack.


XCII.

    French.

    Loin hors du Regne mis en hazard voiage,
    Grand Ost duyra, pour soy l’occupera,
    Le Roy tiendra les siens captif, ostage,
    A son retour tout Pais pillera.

    English.

    Far from the Kingdom a hazardous journey undertaken,
    He shall lead a great Army, which he shall make his own,
    The King shall keep his prisoners, and pledges,
    At his return he shall plunder all the Countrey.

ANNOT.

These obscure words signifie no more but that a King shall send a great
Army far from his Kingdom, the Commander of which Army shall make the
Army his own, which the King hearing, shall seize upon the Commanders
Relations, and keep them Prisoners and Hostages, for which the said
General being angry, shall at his return spoil the Countrey.


XCIII.

    French.

    Sept mois sans plus obtiendra prelature,
    Par son decez grand schisme fera naistre,
    Sept mois tiendra un autre la Preture,
    Pres de Venise paix union renaistre.

    English.

    Seven months and no more, he shall obtain the Prelacy,
    By his decease he shall cause a great Schisme,
    Another shall be seven months chief Justice,
    Near Venice peace and union shall grow again.

ANNOT.

By this Prophecy three things are foretold, the first is of a Pope that
shall sit but seven months, at whose death there will be a great Schisme;
the second is of a great Governour or Chief Justice, such as were called
by the ancient Romans Prætores, shall be in authority also but seven
months; and the third, that hard by Venice all these differences shall
be composed, and peace made again.


XCIV.

    French.

    Devant la Lac ou plus cher fut getté,
    De sept mois & son Ost desconfit,
    Seront Hispans par Albanois gastez,
    Par delay perte en donnant le conflict.

    English.

    Before the Lake wherein most dear was thrown,
    Of seven months, and his Army overthrown,
    Spaniards shall be spoiled by Albaneses,
    By delaying; loss in giving the Battle.

ANNOT.

It is very difficult, if not impossible to tell what our Author meaneth
by the Lake, wherein the most dear was thrown, and lost his Army. The
Albaneses are a Nation between the Venetians and Greece, now for
the most part subject to the said Venetians.


XCV.

    French.

    Le Seducteur sera mis dans la Fosse,
    Et estaché jusques a quelque temps,
    Le Clerc uny, le Chef avec sa Crosse,
    Pycante droite attraira les contems.

    English.

    The Deceiver shall be put into the Dungeon,
    And bound fast for a while,
    The Clerk united, the head with his Crosierstaf,
    Pricking upright, shall draw in the contented.

ANNOT.

The two first Verses are plain, the two last Verses not so, which seemeth
to foretell of a great union among the Clergy, which shall draw to them
those that were peaceably affected.


XCVI.

    French.

    La Synagogue sterile sans nul fruit,
    Sera receue entre les Infideles,
    De Babylon la fille du poursuit,
    Misere & triste luy trenchera les Aisles.

    English.

    The Synagogue barren, without fruit,
    Shall be received among the Infidels,
    In Babylon, the daughter of the persecuted,
    Miserable and sad shall cut her wings.

ANNOT.

A Synagogue is a place where the Jews assemble for Divine Worship, as
the Christians do in Churches or Temples, the said Jews Synagogue is
threatned here to be unfruitful and barren, and chiefly in Babylon, by
the means of a woman, daughter of one persecuted; belike of some of their
own tribe, whom the rest did persecute.


XCVII.

    French.

    Au fins du Var changer le Pompotans,
    Pres du Rivage, les trois beaux enfans naistre,
    Ruine au peuple par Aage competans,
    Regne au Pais changer plus voir croistre.

    English.

    At the ends of the Var to change the Pompotans,
    Near the Shore shall three fair Children be born,
    Ruine to the people by competent Age,
    To change that Countreys Kingdom, and see it grow no more.

ANNOT.

The first Verse being made of insignificant words, as Var and
Pompotans cannot be understood; the other three doth foretel of three
handsom Children, that shall be born near the Shore, which when they have
attained a competent Age, shall change the Kingdom of that Countrey, and
suppress it.


XCVIII.

    French.

    Des gens d’Eglise sang sera espanché,
    Comme de l’eau en si grande abundance,
    Et de long temps ne sera retranché,
    Veüe au Clerc ruine & doleance.

    English.

    The blood of Churchmen shall be spilt,
    As water in such abundance,
    And for a good while shall not be stayed,
    Ruine and grievance shall be seen to the Clerk.

ANNOT.

This is easie to be understood, which foretelleth a very great
persecution to the Clergy-men, viz. Papists, of which Religion our
Author was, if this be not already past in the Civil Wars of France,
that were made for Religion, in the beginning of Reformation, where
abundance of Clergy-men did perish on both sides.


XCIX.

    French.

    Par la puissance des trois Rois temporels,
    En autre lieu sera mis la Saint Siege,
    Ou la substance de l’Esprit corporel,
    Sera remis & receu pour vray Siege.

    English.

    By the power of three Temporal Kings,
    The Holy See shall be put in another place,
    Where the substance of the Corporeal Spirit,
    Shall be restored and admitted for a true seat.

ANNOT.

This Stanza is very remarkable, for the thing it foretelleth, viz. a
translation of the See of Rome, that is, the Popedom into another place
by three Temporal Kings, and not onely that, but it seemeth by the sense
of the last two Verses, that these will keep the Ecclesiastical authority
to themselves.


C.

    French.

    Pour l’abundance de l’Armée respandue,
    Du haut en bas, par le bas au plus haut,
    Trop grande foy par jeu vie perdue,
    De soif mourir par abondant defaut.

    English.

    Through the abundance of the Army scattered,
    High and low, low and high,
    Too great a belief a life lost in jesting,
    To die by thirst, through abundance of want.

ANNOT.

The sense of this is, that by reason of a great Army that shall be much
scattered, and occupy a great deal of room, water will be so scarce, that
some shall die for thirst, it is that he calleth here, To die by thirst,
through abundance of want.


Other Stanza’s heretofore Printed, under the VIII. CENTURY.


I.

    French.

    Seront confus plusieurs de leur attente,
    Aux habitans ne sera pardonné,
    Qui bien pensoint perseverer l’attente,
    Mais grand loisir ne leur sera donné.

    English.

    Many shall be confounded in their expectation,
    The Citizens shall not be forgiven,
    Who thought to persevere in their resolution,
    But there shall not be given them a great leisure for it.

ANNOT.

This is plain, and needeth no interpretation.


II.

    French.

    Plusieurs viendront & parleront de Paix,
    Entre Monarques & Seigneurs bien puissans,
    Mais ne sera accordé de si pres,
    Que ne se rendent plus qu’autres obeissans.

    English.

    Many shall come and shall talk of Peace,
    Between Monarchs and Lords very powerful,
    But it shall not be agreed to it so soon,
    If they do not shew themselves more obedient then others.

ANNOT.

We are just now at the Eve of this Prophecy, when so many Princes and
Potentates do busie themselves about a Mediation between the two Crowns
of France and Spain, &c.


III.

    French.

    Las quelle fureur, helas quelle pitie,
    Il y aura entre beaucoup de gens,
    On ne vit onc une tell amitié,
    Qu’auront les Loups a courir diligens.

    English.

    Ha! what fury, alas what pitty,
    There shall be betwixt many people,
    There was never seen such a friendship,
    As the Wolfs shall have in being diligent to run.

ANNOT.

It is indeed a great fury and pity to see how wicked people, and chiefly
Usurers and false dealers, (understood here by the name of Wolfs) are
diligent in doing mischief, and to make good the old Proverb, Homo
homini Lupus, there being no other Creature but the Wolf that devours
those of his own kind.


IV.

    French.

    Beaucoup de gens viendront parlementer,
    Aux grand Seigneurs qui leur feront la guerre,
    On ne voudra en rien les escouter,
    Helas! si Dieu n’envoie Paix en Terre.

    English.

    Many folks shall come to speak,
    To great Lords that shall make War against them,
    They shall not be admitted to a hearing,
    Alas! if God doth not send Peace upon Earth.

ANNOT.

This carrieth its sense with it, and is plain.


V.

    French.

    Plusieurs secours viendront de tous costez,
    De gens lointains qui voudront resister,
    Ils seront tout a coup bien hastez,
    Mais ne pourront pour cette heure assister.

    English.

    Many helps shall come on all sides,
    Of people far off, that would fain to resist,
    They shall be upon a sudden all very hasty,
    But for the present they shall not be able to assist.

ANNOT.

This seemeth to point at this present conjuncture of affairs, where there
is so many buisying themselves about the relief of Flanders, of which I
see no great likelihood.


VI.

    French.

    Las quel plaisir ont Princes estrangers,
    Garde toy bien qu’en ton Pais ne Vienne,
    Il y auroit de terribles dangers,
    Et en maintes Contrées, mesme en la Vienne.

    English.

    Ha! what pleasure take Forrain Princes?
    Take heed least any should come into thy Countrey,
    There should be terrible dangers,
    In several Countreys, and chiefly in Vienna.

ANNOT.

There is two Towns called Vienna’s, one is in Germany, in the
Province of Austria, and is the Emperours Seat, the other in France,
a metter of twenty miles beyond Lion, the rest is easie.




THE PROPHECIES OF Michael Nostradamus.

CENTURY IX.


I.

    French.

    Dans la maison du Traducteur de Boure,
    Seront les lettres trouvées sur la Table,
    Borgne, roux blanc, chenu, tiendra de cours,
    Qui changera au nouveau Connestable.

    English.

    In the house of the Translator of Boure,
    The Letters shall be found upon the Table,
    Blind of one eye, red, white, hoary, shall keep its course,
    Which shall change at the coming of the new Constable.

ANNOT.

It is not easie to understand what he meaneth by the Translator of
Boure, unless it be some mean and pittiful fellow, that lived by
Translating things from one language into another, because the French
use to call a man that is inconsiderable, un homme du boure, that is a
man of Flocks; and so much the more I am of this opinion, because of the
scurvy Epithetes, he attributeth to the same person, by which he might
easily be known as blind of one eye, red, white, hoary, &c.


II.

    French.

    Du haut du Mont Aventin voix ouye,
    Vuidez, vuidez de tous les deux costez,
    Du sang des rouges sera l’Ire assouvie,
    D’Arimin, Prato, Columna debotez.

    English.

    From the top of Mount Aventin, a voice was heard,
    Get you gone, get you gone on all sides,
    The Choler shall be fed with the blood of the red ones,
    From Arimini and Prato, the Colonnas shall be driven away.

ANNOT.

Mount Aventine is one of the seven Mountains of Rome, from the top of
which our Author saith that a voice was heard crying and repeating, get
you gone, and the reason is, because choler and anger shall feed upon
the blood of the Cardinals, understood here by the name of red ones.

Arimini and Prato are two cities in Italy.

The Colonna is the chiefest and ancientest family of Rome.


III.

    French.

    Le magna vaqua a Ravenne grand trouble,
    Conduits par quinze enserrez a Fornase,
    A Rome naistra deux Monstres a teste double,
    Sang, feu, deluge, les plus grands a l’espase.

    English.

    The Magna vaqua great trouble at Ravenna,
    Conducted by fifteen, shut up at Fornase,
    At Rome shall be born two Monsters with a double head,
    Blood, fire, Flood, the greater ones astonished.

ANNOT.

This word of Magna vaqua is either falsly printed, or altogether
barbarous and insignificant, and so is that of Fornase, which maketh
the two first Verses incapable of translation; the other are easie.


IV.

    French.

    L’An ensuivant descouverts par Deluge,
    Deux chefs esleus, le premier ne tiendra,
    De fuyr ombre a l’un deux le refuge,
    Saccagée case qui premier maintiendra.

    English.

    The year following being discovered by a Flood,
    Two Chiefs elected, the first shall not hold,
    To fly from shade, to one shall be a refuge,
    That house shall be plundered which shall maintain the first.

ANNOT.

Our Author meaneth, that the year after the former Prophecy is come to
pass, this shall also be fulfilled, whereby two Chief Commanders shall be
chosen, the first of which shall not stand, but shall be compelled to run
away, and to seek his security in the open Fields, and that house that
did uphold the first shall be plundered.


V.

    French.

    Tiers doigt du pied au premier semblera,
    A un nouveau Monarque de bas haut,
    Qui Pise & Luiques tyran occupera,
    Du precedent corriger le defaut.

    English.

    The third toe of the foot shall be like the first,
    To a new high Monarch come from low estate,
    Who being a Tyrant shall cease upon Pise and Luica,
    To correct the faults of him that preceded him.

ANNOT.

The meaning of this is, that some body pretending to mend the Government
of those two places that are in Italy, shall tyrannically make himself
Master of them.


VI.

    French.

    Par la Guyenne infinité d’Anglois,
    Occuperont par nom d’Angle Aquitaine,
    Du Languedoc. I. palme Bourdelois,
    Quils nommeront apres Barboxitaine.

    English.

    There shall be in Guyenna an infinite number of English,
    Who shall occupy it by the name of Angle Aquitaine,
    Of Languedoc, I by the Land of Bourdeaux,
    Which afterwards they shall call Barboxitaine.

ANNOT.

Here is foretold a famous invasion, that shall be made by the English
upon that part of France called Guyenne, and in Latine Aquitania,
of which Bourdeaux is the chief City, insomuch, that the English
afterwards shall call that Countrey Angl’ Aquitaine.


VII.

    French.

    Qui ouvrira le Monument trouvé,
    Et ne viendra le serrer promptement,
    Mal luy viendra & ne poura prouvé,
    Si mieux doibt estre Roy Breton ou Normand.

    English.

    He that shall open the Sepulchre found,
    And shall not close it up again presently,
    Evil will befall him, and he shall not be able to prove
    Whether is best a Britain or Norman King.

ANNOT.

The sense of this is perspicuous.


VIII.

    French.

    Puisnay Roy fait son pere mettre a mort,
    Apres conflict de mort tres in honeste,
    Escrit trouvé soupcon, donra, remort,
    Quand loup chassé pose sur la couchete.

    English.

    A younger King causeth his father to be put
    To a dishonest death, after a Battle,
    Writing shall be found, that shall give suspicion and remorse,
    When a hunted Wolf shall rest upon a truckle bed.

ANNOT.

The words and sense are plain.


IX.

    French.

    Quand Lampe ardente de feu inextinguible,
    Sera trouvée au Temple des Vestales,
    Enfant trouvée, feu, eau passant par crible,
    Nismes eau perir, Tholouse cheoir les Halles.

    English.

    When a Lamp burning with unquenchable fire,
    Shall be found in the Temple of the Vestals,
    A Child shall be found, Water running through a Sieve,
    Nismes to perish by Water, the Market-hall shall fall at Tholouse.

ANNOT.

The ancient Vestals, were a Kind of Religious Virgins in the ancient
Romans time, who if they did forfeit their honour, were buried alive
in a Cave, with a little Bread and Water, and a Lamp burning, our
Author would have, that when a Lamp shall be found lighted with an
unquenchable fire, in that place where then their Temple was, that then
Nismes (which is a City of Languedoc), shall perish by Water, and
the Market-hall of Tholouse shall fall, whether such a Lamp may be
contrived as to burn with an unquenchable fire, is too long and tedious a
discourse to be disputed here.


X.

    French.

    Moine, Moinesse d’Enfant mort exposé,
    Mourir par Ourse & ravy par verrier,
    Par Foix & Panniers le Camp sera posé,
    Contre Tholose, Carcas, dresser forrier.

    English.

    Monk and Nun having exposed a dead Child,
    To be killed by a she Bear, and snatcht away by a Glazier,
    The Camp shall be set by Foix and Panniers,
    And against Tholouse, Carcas shall raise a Harbinger.

ANNOT.

Foix and Panniers are two Towns in Languedoc, and so are Tholouse
and Carcassonne, called here Carcas, for the abbreviation of the
Verse, the sense then of this prophecy is, that when the two first Verses
shall come to pass, that then an Army shall lie about those Towns, and
Carcassonne shall be against Thoulouse.


XI.

    French.

    Le juste a tort a mort l’on viendra mettre,
    Publiquement, & du milieu estaint,
    Si grande Peste en ce lieu viendra naistre,
    Que les Jugeans fouyr seront contraints.

    English.

    The just shall be put to death wrongfully,
    Publickly, and being taken out of the midst,
    So great a Plague shall break into that place,
    That the Judges shall be compelled to run away.

ANNOT.

Many understand this of the late King, and last Plague.


XII.

    French.

    Le tant d’argent de Diane & Mercure,
    Les simulachres au Lac seront trouvez,
    Le Figulier cherchant argille neuve,
    Luy & les siens, d’or seront abreuvez.

    English.

    The so much Silver of Diana and Mercury,
    The Statues shall be found in the Lake,
    The Potter seeking for new clay,
    He and his shall be filled with Gold.

ANNOT.

This Prophecy is concerning a Potter, who seeking and digging for
new Clay, shall find in a drained Lake the Statues of Diana and
Mercury all of silver, besides other great riches; seeing this Prophecy
is not come to pass yet (that I know) it will not be amiss, for the
divertisement of the Reader, to relate here a notable and authentical
History of a Potter that hath much ressemblance with this, and will be
a convincing Argument, that Mines grow in the Earth as Turfs do, and as
Virgil sayeth of the golden branch:

    Uno avulso non deficit alter.

It is written by Doctor de Rochas, Physitian to the present Chancellor
or France, who was upon the place, and an eye witness of the
circumstances of it, having also an interest in it, in the behalf of his
Father, who was overseer of the Mines in that Province, therefore I shall
relate it in his own words, as they are in his Book of Mineral Waters.

[Sidenote: A notable History.]

In Provence near Thoulon, is a Mountain called Carquairené, at the
foot of which and near the brim of the Sea, there dwelled a Potter with
all his tools about him; It chanced that on a day as he went to fetch
Wood in that Mountain, to bake his wares, he heard a voice of a little
Kid, which some Shepherd had left behind them unawares, and was fallen
in a little hole that answered to natural, great and deep Caves; this
man seeing no Shepherds about him, thought presently it was a strayed
Kid, therefore he followed the cry with his ear so directly, that he came
by the orifice of that hole, where he heard and saw the Kid, which he
resolved to carry away with his Wood, therefore he took the Cords that
were at his Mules Saddle, and that he used to bind his Load with, and
with the help of them, and of some big pieces of Wood he got down, where,
he did observe round about him many other Caves, contiguous and separated
from this, which his curiosity caused him to view, and found in the chief
of these Caves a great quantity of stones heaped upon one another, & of a
substance and colour of Brass, and among the rest there was one that came
forth out of the Rock, about the bigness, shape, and length of a mans
arm, when it is stretched out; he did apparently judge that the weight
and brittleness of that matter had caused those stones to fall down,
and that the same that he saw come out of the Rock in this manner, was
already loose and like to fall; this man finding himself among such an
abundance of rich Lingots, which fortune did offer him, did not know the
value of them, but did like the Cock of Æsop which left the precious
Pearl to take the Corn of Wheat; thus this Jason took very little of
this Golden Fleece, and only a small piece, which he broke from a bigger
with one of his Tools, and imployed all his industry to carry away his
Kid, which at last with much ado he got out, and carried upon his Mule,
believing certainly that this provision would be more profitable to
him and his Family, then the yellow stone which he had in his pocket,
weighing about five pounds, and which he intended to give to a Tinker
of Thoulon, his Gossip and good friend, in hope that for the same he
might be presented with a bottle of Wine, to keep company to his Kid; and
accordingly the next morning by break of day he went to Thoulon and
stayed in the Shop of his friend, who did look with admiration upon so
resplendent Brass; a Gold-smith who lodged over the way, and observed
the splendor of that Divine mettal, drew near, and presently would have
bargained for it, with a great deal of transportation and alteration.
The Potter asked him only twenty pence, which the Gold-Smith would have
given him presently, but the Tinker making sign to him to retract his
words, he put his lingot in his pocket again, with protestation that he
would not part with it, unless he had something that were worth the pains
of going where he had it; in conclusion, after many contestations and
disputes, the Potter who did suspect that it might be gold, would not
sell nor deliver it under the sum of thirty Crowns, which the Gold-Smith
paid him presently, and which he carried away with more joy, then if he
had been possessor of greater riches; the Gold-smith on the other side,
who thought that his profit would be above a hundred pounds sterlings,
did refine this stone, that was about five pound weight, out of which he
drew four pound weight, of very good and pure gold, the rest was a kind
of dross, that made it thus brittle; one ought not to think that the Mine
is all of the same perfection, but it purifieth it self, according as
nature thrusteth it out of the Rock, as we see that Rubies and Emeralds
are purer, then the Rock from whence they come. This Gold-Smith having
found such fortune, and being resolved to make the best use of it, went
to the Lord Scaravaque, then Governour of the Town, and imparted unto
him this new discovery, that he might have his assistance and favour in
it, and that under his power and authority he might follow and wait upon
this precious business without being disturbed by any body, to which the
Governour did so much the easier consent, that this Tradesman did oblidge
himself to give him the best part of the profit that should arise from
thence, and that should exceed any Travels into the Indies or Peru.

In the mean time the Potter was not asleep, the Gold-smiths money had
stirred his appetite, and the charm of this witchcraft that worketh
generally upon all spirits, did put him upon new hopes. He went into
the Mountain with his wife, and with the help of a rope Ladder, which
he had provided, and some Iron tools, wherewith he had loaded his Mule,
he went down into the Caves, and with much endeavour did at last break
that piece, that came out of the Rock like a mans arm, because all the
other that were tumbled upon the ground, were so big and heavy that he
could not remove them, when he had broken it down, though it were about
fourscore and two pounds weight, nevertheless with the help of his wife
and of his Ropes and Ladder he got out again, and stopt the hole with a
large stone, and some Earth, upon which he planted some small Bushes so
ingeniously, that this hole could never be found out again.

The Lord Scaravaque who was most impatient, to conquer like another
Jason this Golden Fleece, and who was set on by the persuasions of the
Gold-smith, sent for the Potter, under pretence to employ him in the
making and furnishing of some Tiles and other small commodities that
depended on his art. The Potter obeyed presently, drawn by the hopes to
sell his wares well, and mistrusting nothing at all what they would ask
him. As soon as he came, the Governour asked him and perswaded him with
the best and most flattering words he could, to tell where he had the
yellow stone that he sold to the Gold-smith. The Potter who more and more
began to know the value of this rare Treasure, invented presently a lie,
to free himself of the importunity of them that would have deceived him;
therefore with an ingenuity, as simple as artificial he answered, he had
found it upon the brim of the Sea, where may be some Ship had been cast
away, or the Waves had cast it upon the shore.

The Governour answered that this could not be, and therefore threatned
him of violence, and to send for all that he had in his House, which
put the fellow into a great perplexity, because of the other stone that
should be found there, therefore he chose rather to give it them out
of his good will, then to put himself in danger of loosing all, and
perchance of being abused to boot, without any more ado, he ingenuously
confessed he had another piece of the same stuff as the former in his
House, which he had likewise found in the same place, which he was
ready to put into their hands, provided he might have his share of it,
and be suffered to get his livelihood peaceably. The Lord Scaravaque
did promise him all what he desired, and gave him some men to keep him
company, with command to bring him back again, and to take special care
he should not make an escape. At last this poor man came back again
with that piece, which did more inflame the passion that the Governour
had to know the place whence came that rich treasure; but neither for
prayers, promises, or threats he would never reveal it, which did oblige
the Governour to shut him up close in a Chamber, where nevertheless they
gave him Victuals and made ready a Bed, but he refused both, and by
an extraordinary sadness, gave shew that some notorious mischance was
waiting on him, which proved true, for he was found dead in the Morning;
which did put the Lord Scaravaque in a grief unexpressible, to see
himself deprived by this accident, of the fruit that his hopes had made
him conceive. He had recourse to the Potters wife for this discovery, but
she could never attain to it, whatsoever exact searches she could make:
yea, and after she was married again with a young man, who had spent in
that search most of his time. The Lord Scaravaque and other persons
of quality have employed all their skills and endeavours, but all their
industry and charges have been without effect, as well as of many others,
who attempted the same; about that time my Father who was overseer of
the Mines in Provence, having received the news of a business of
such consequence, that did concern his place, went presently unto that
Mountain, to see if he could discover those wonders, I was then in his
company, as also that woman, viz. the Potters wife, who carried us in
several places for many days, without any success at all, although she
gave notice that she could here the Waves of the Sea, when she was in the
Cave with her first Husband, so that all our endeavours proved fruitless
and unprofitable, because my Father fell sick, which made us forsake our
quest, which is of such a consequence as not to be neglected.

During the time of our painful visiting that Mountain, I did consider the
particularities of that rich Mountain, and observed that the top of it
was almost all Azur, which tokens are the beams of that golden Sun and
are the hairs of that fair goodness, under whose feet all things submit;
in a word, are the true and infallible signs that underneath are Mines
of Gold and Silver. And as I have directed all my thoughts many times to
find out the means to compass so excellent a work, whose profit would
surpass all what the Indies furnish unto strangers, and that with so
much less charges and danger, that there is no heed of Ships or Fleet to
cross over the Sea, from one Pole to the other, nor fight against any
enemies: at last I have attained to a certain knowledge, which putteth me
in hope, and makes me promise and engage my word, that at least I shall
find a thred of that golden Mine, which may chance to lead us to the
Centre of all these Treasures, but the Royal Authority being necessary
to prop up this design, it belongeth to his Majesty to take what course
he thinketh best for this, and to me to obey, execute his will. This
digression which is an assured experiment, (that is a certain truth),
is not come into this discourse, but only to prove that Mines grow by
augmentation, in converting into their own nature the more subtle parts
of the Neighbouring Earth. Thus far Doctor de Rochas.


XIII.

    French.

    Les Exilez autour de la Sologne,
    Conduits de nuict pour marcher en l’Auxois,
    Deux de Modene truculent de Bologne,
    Mis discouverts par feu de Burancois.

    English.

    The banished about Sologne,
    Being conducted by night to go into Auxois,
    Two of Modena, the cruel of Bolonia,
    Shall be discovered by the fire of Burancois.

ANNOT.

Sologne is a Province in France, between the Perche and the Main.
Auxois is a Countrey in the South of France, so called of its chief
Town called Auch, the seat of an Archbishop. Modena is a Town in
Italy, and Bolonia another not far from it. Burancois is a part of
the Province of Dauphiné. The meaning then of this Prophecy is, this
being known, the Reader may easily find out the rest of the sense.


XIV.

    French.

    Mis en planure chauderon d’Infecteurs,
    Vin miel en huile & bastis sur Fourneaux,
    Seront plongez sans mal dit malfacteurs,
    Sept. fum. extaint au Canon des Borneaux.

    English.

    A Dyers Kettle being put an a Plein,
    With Wine, Honey and Oil, and built upon Furnace,
    Shall be dipt, without evil, called Malefactors,
    Seven. fum. put out at the Canon of Borneaux.

ANNOT.

This hath a relation to the punishment, which in some parts of France
and Flanders is inflicted upon false Coiners, which are commonly boiled
in Oil, in a great Kettle, such as our Author here saith belong to Dyers.
The Author then will have that the time shall come, when seven of that
gang shall be so punished together in a Plain, where a great Kettle shall
be set for that purpose upon a Furnace.


XV.

    French.

    Pres de Parpan les rouges detenus,
    Ceux du milieu parfondrez menez loing,
    Trois mis en pieces, & cinq mal soustenus,
    Pour le Seigneur & Prelat de Bourgoing.

    English.

    Near unto Parpan the red ones detained,
    Those of the middle sunk and carried far off,
    Three cut in pieces, and five ill backed,
    For the Lord and Prelate of Burgoing.

ANNOT.

Parpan is either a barbarous or fained name, by the red ones, he
hath hitherto understood some Cardinals, the Reader may expound the rest
according to his fancy.


XVI.

    French.

    De Castel Franco sortira l’assemblée,
    L’Ambassadeur non plaisant fera Schisme,
    Ceux de Riviere seront en la meslée,
    Et au grand Goulphre desnieront l’entrée.

    English.

    Out of Castel Franco shall come the Assembly,
    The Embassador not pleased, shall make a Schisme,
    Those of Riviere shall be in the medley,
    And shall deny the entry of the great Gulf.

ANNOT.

Castel Franco is a Town in Piemont; Riviere is a strong Castle in
Burgundy, but what he meaneth by the great Gulfe, is more then I can
tell.


XVII.

    French.

    Le tiers premier, pis que ne fit Neron,
    Vuidez vaillant que sang humain respandre,
    Redifier fera le Forneron,
    Siecle d’or mort, nouveau Roy grand esclandre.

    English.

    The third first, worse than ever did Nero,
    Go out valliant, he shall spill much humane blood,
    He shall cause the Forneron to be builded again,
    Golden Age dead, new King great troubles.

ANNOT.

This Prophecy pointeth directly at our Authors Master Charles the IX.
King of France, whom he calleth he the third first, because he was
the third son to Henry II. and came to be King, using more cruelties
then ever Nero did, for he was the cause of the Massacre of the
Protestants in France in the year 1572. where above a hundred thousand
people were murdered. Forneron is a barbarous word, put here to make a
Verse, and to rhime with Neron. At that time he saith the Golden Age
was dead, and upon the coming of a new King, who was Henry III. great
tumults did happen, and great Wars, as is to be seen in the French
History.


XVIII.

    French.

    Le Lys Dauffois portera dans Nancy,
    Jusques en Flanders Electeur de l’Empire,
    Neusve obturée au grand Montmorency,
    Hors lieux pronez delivre a clere peyne.

    English.

    Dauffois shall carry the Lillie into Nancy,
    As far as Flanders the Elector of the Empire,
    New hinderance to great Montmorency,
    Out of proved places, delivered to a clear pain.

ANNOT.

Although the words and sense of this Prophecy be most obscure,
nevertheless we shall endeavour as much as we can to render them
something intelligible to the Reader.

By the first Verse is to be understood that Dauffois, or rather
Dauphinois, which is the Title of the Kings of France eldest Son
shall carry the Lillie, which is the Arms of France into Nancy, the
chief Town in Lorrain, which came to pass in the time of the last King
Lewis the XIII.

By the second Verse is understood the Elector of Triers, who was taken
by the Spaniards in his own Town, and carried prisoner to Bruxelles.

By the third and fourth is expressed the ill luck of the Duke of
Montmorency, who having taken part with the Duke of Lorrain, and
the Duke of Orleans the Kings Brother, was routed in a Battle, taken
prisoner, and afterwards beheaded at Thoulouse.


XIX.

    French.

    Dans le milieu de la Forest Mayenne,
    Sol au Lion la Foudre tombera,
    Le grand Bastard issu du grand du Maine,
    Ce jour Fougeres pointe en sang entrera.

    English.

    In the middle of the Forrest of Mayenne,
    Sol being in Leo the Lightning shall fall,
    The great Bastard begot by the great du Main,
    That day Fougeres shall enter its point into blood.

ANNOT.

Fougeres is either the name of a Town in little Britanny, or that of
a Noble House, the words are very plain, therefore I leave the sense to
every ones capacity.


XX.

    French.

    De nuit viendra par la Forest de Rennes,
    Deux parts Voltorte Herne, la pierre blanche,
    Le Moine noir en gris dedans Varennes,
    Esleu Cap. cause tempeste, feu, sang tranche.

    English.

    By night shall come through the Forrest of Rennis,
    Two parts Voltorte Herne, the white stone,
    The black Monk in gray within Varennes,
    Elected Cap. causeth tempest, fire, blood cutteth.

ANNOT.

Rennes is the chief Town of little Britanny; the second Verse being
made of barbarous words, is impossible to be understood. The third
and fourth Verse signifieth, that when a black Monk in that Town of
Varennes shall put on a gray sute, he shall be elected Captain, and
cause a great tempest or broils by fire and blood.


XXI.

    French.

    Au Temple hault de Blois sacre Salonne,
    Nuict Pont de Loire, Prelat, Roy pernicant,
    Cuiseur victoire aux marests de la Lone,
    D’ou Prelature de blancs abormeant?

    English.

    At the high Temple of Blois sacred Salonne,
    In the night the Bridge of Loire, Prelat, King mischievous,
    A smarting Victory in the Marsh of Lone,
    Whence Prelature of white ones shall be abortive.

ANNOT.

There is a mistake in the first Verse, for instead of Salonne, it must
be written Soulaire, which is a Priory and Church at the top of
Blois, all the rest signifieth that in one night these shall happen,
viz. that the Bridge, the Prelat, and a pernicious King with a smart
victory shall perish, whence the Prelature, that is the place of Command
upon the white ones, viz. Canons and Prebends in their Surplices, shall
be void and empty.


XXII.

    French.

    Roy & sa Cour au lieu de la langue halbe,
    Dedans le Temple vis a vis du Palais,
    Dans le Jardin Duc de Montor & d’Albe,
    Albe & Mantor, poignard, langue, en Palais.

    English.

    King and his Court in the place of langue halbe,
    Within the Church over against the Pallace,
    In the Garden Duke of Montor and Albe,
    Albe and Mantor, dagger, tongue and Pallate.

ANNOT.

This Stanza is very obscure, for, first no body can tell what he meaneth
by langue halbe, which is the foundation of all the rest of the sense;
Secondly, what this Duke of Montor and Mantor should be, which has
been unknown in the Histories hitherto; and thirdly, what construction
and sense can be made of these disjunctives: Albe, Mantor, Dagger,
Tongue, Palate. Therefore i’le leave it free to every bodies opinion
to make his construction.


XXIII.

    French.

    Puisnay jouant au fresch dessous la tonne,
    Le haut du toit du milieu sur la teste,
    Le Pere Roy au Temple Saint Solonne,
    Sacrifiant sacrera sum de feste.

    English.

    The youngest Son playing under the tun,
    The top of the House shall fall upon his head,
    The King his Father in the Temple of Saint Soulaine,
    Sacrificing shall make festival smoak.

ANNOT.

By this is meant, that the youngest Son of a King, shall be knocked in
the head, while he is a playing under a tun; his Father being at the same
time in the Temple of Saint Soulaine at Mass.


XXIV.

    French.

    Sur le Palais au Rocher des Fenestres,
    Seront ravis les deux petits Roiaux,
    Passer Aurelle, Lutece, Denis cloistres,
    Nonnain, Mollods avaler verts noiaux.

    English.

    Upon the Pallace at the Rock of the Windows;
    Shall be carried the two little Royal ones,
    To pass Aurele, Lutece, Denis Cloisters,
    Nonnain, Mollods to swallow green stones of fruit.

ANNOT.

These two or three last Stanzas have been concerning the City of Blois,
to which it seemeth that this hath also relation, for he saith that
two little Royal Children shall be carried at the top of the Castle,
and shall be conveyed beyond Aurelle (which is Orleans in Latine
Aurelianum) Lutece, which is Paris; S. Denis Cloisters, which is
beyond Paris, and a Nunnery besides, where it is like they shall be
left to eat green stones of fruit, which is not easie to be understood,
no more then the word Mollods.


XXV.

    French.

    Passant les Ponts, venir prez de Roziers,
    Tard arrivé plustost quil cuidera,
    Viendront les noves Espagnols a Beziers,
    Qui icelle chasse emprinse cassera.

    English.

    Going over the Bridge to come near the Rose-trees,
    Come late, and sooner then he thought,
    The new Spaniards shall come to Beziers,
    Who shall cashiere this new undertaken hunting.

ANNOT.

Beziers is a City in Languedoc; the rest may be construed by the
meanest capacity.


XXVI.

    French.

    Nise sortie sur nom des Lettres aspres,
    La grande Cappe fera present non sien,
    Proche de Vultry aux murs des vertes capres,
    Apres Plombin le vent a bon escient.

    English.

    A silly going out, caused by sharp Letters
    The great Cap shall give what is not his,
    Near Vultry by the Walls of green Capers,
    About Piombino the wind shall be in good earnest.

ANNOT.

This signifieth that there shall be a silly surrendring of a Town, caused
by sharp and threatning Letters that shall be sent into it. By the great
Cap he useth to understand the Pope, who he saith shall give what
is not it, as he hath done many times; Vultry, in Latine Velitrum,
and Piombino are two Cities in Italy, which are threatned here with
mighty winds.


XXVII.

    French.

    De bois la garde vent clos ront Pont sera,
    Haut le receu frappera le Dauphin,
    Le vieux Teccon bois unis passera,
    Passant plus outre du Duc le droit confin.

    English.

    The Fence being of Wood, close Wind, Bridge shall be broken,
    He that’s received high, shall strike at the Dolphin,
    The old Teccon shall pass over smooth Wood,
    Going over the right confines of the Duke.

ANNOT.

The first Verse signifieth that a woodden Bridge shall be broken by a
close wind, as did happen to the Millers Bridge, and the Birds Bridge in
Paris.

The second Verse seemeth to foretel the conspiracy of the Mareshal of
Biron, against Henry IV. his Dolphin and Estate.

The third and fourth, the Wars and Conquest which the said King (whom he
called old Teccon), made upon the Duke of Savoy, who had corrupted
the said Marshal of Biron.


XXVIII.

    French.

    Voile Symacle, Port Massiliolique,
    Dans Venise Port marcher aux Pannons,
    Partir du Goulfre & sinus Illirique,
    Vast a Sicile, Ligurs coups de Canon.

    English.

    Symaclian Sail, Massilian Port,
    In Venice to march towards the Hungarians,
    To go away from the Gulf and Illirick Sea,
    Toward Sicily, the Genoeses with Cannon shots.

ANNOT.

What he meaneth by Symaclian Sail, is not easie to determine;
Massilian Port is that of Marseilles in France, called in Latine
Massilia, the sense of this Prophecy then if any be, is, that a
great Fleet shall go from thence to Venice, to carry succours to the
Hungarians, who it seemeth shall be much distressed at that time by
the Turks, and that Sicily and Genoa shall add to this Fleet a
considerable succour of Men, and Warlike Munition.


XXIX.

    French.

    Lors que celuy qu’a nul ne donne lieu,
    Abandonner voudra lieu prins non pris,
    Feu, Nef, par faignes, bitument a Charlieu,
    Seront Quintin, Bales repris.

    English.

    When he that giveth place to no body,
    Shall forsake the place taken, and not taken,
    Fire, Ship, by bleeding bituminous at Charlieu,
    Then Quintin and Bales shall be taken again.

ANNOT.

He that giveth place to no body is the Pope; as for the last Verse, I
had rather read St. Quintin and Gales, which are two considerable
Towns in France, then otherwise.

That place taken, not taken was the City of Noyon in Picardy, which
was taken by the Spanish Cavalry, cloathed after the French Mode,
which stratagem deceived the Citizens and Soldiers that defended it: so
he saith taken, because it fell into the hands of the Spaniards, and
not taken, because it was by a stratagem or deceit.


XXX.

    French.

    Au Port de Puola & de St. Nicolas,
    Perir Normande au Gouffre Phanatique,
    Cap de Bizance rues crier Helas!
    Secours de Gaddes & du grand Philippique.

    English.

    At the Harbour of Puola and of St. Nicolas,
    A Norman Ship shall perish in the Phanatick Gulf,
    At the Cape of Byzantium the streets shall cry Alas!
    Succours from Cadis and from the great Philippe.

ANNOT.

Puola is for Paulo here, and by it is understood the port of Malta,
which being Besieged by the Turks, Philip the II. King of Spain,
sent an Army to relieve it, which made those of Byzantium (which is
Constantinople) cry alas, &c.


XXXI.

    French.

    Le tremblement de Terre a Mortara,
    Cassich, St. George a demy perfondrez,
    Paix assoupie la guerre esuaillera,
    Dans Temple a Pasques abysmes enfondrez.

    English.

    There shall be an Earthquake at Mortara,
    Cassich, St. George shall be half swallowed up,
    The War shall awake the sleeping pace,
    Upon Easterday shall be a great hole sunk in the Church.

ANNOT.

Mortara is a Town in Italy, by Cassich and St. George he meaneth
two other places.


XXXII.

    French.

    De fin Porphire profond Collon trouvée
    Dessoubs la laze escrits Capitolin,
    Os, poil retors, Romain force prouvée,
    Classe agiter au Port de Methelin.

    English.

    A deep Column of fine Porphyry shall be found,
    Under whose Basis shall be Roman writings,
    Bones, haires twisted, Roman force tried,
    A Fleet a gathering about the Port of Methelin.

ANNOT.

Porphiry is a kind of hard red Marble speckled with white spots, which
is very scarce, and chiefly in great pieces; our Author then saieth that
a great Colomn of that stuff shall be found, and about the Basis of it
some words in Roman Characters, and that about that time a great Fleet
shall be a gathering at the Port of Methelin, which is an Island in the
Archipelago, belonging now to the Turks, as for the third Verse, I
cannot tell what to make of it.


XXXIII.

    French.

    Hercules Roy de Rome & Dannemark,
    De Gaule trois Gayon surnommé,
    Trembler l’Itale & l’un de Saint Marc,
    Premier sur tous Monarque renommée.

    English.

    Hercules King of Rome, and Denmark,
    Of France three Guyon surnamed,
    Shall cause Italy to quake and one of St. Marck,
    He shall be above all a famous Monarch.

ANNOT.

All these intricated words and sense foretell that, when a King of
Danmarck named Hercules shall be made King of the Romans, that
then Italy and Venice it self shall stand in great fear of him; and
that he shall be as great a Prince or Monarch as ever was in Europe;
and that very likely, for by his dignity of King of the Romans he
consequently shall attain to the Empire.


XXXIV.

    French.

    Le part solus Mary sera Mitré;
    Retour conflict passera sur la tuille,
    Par cinq cens un trahir sera tultré,
    Narbon & Saulce par coutaux avons d’huile.

    English.

    The separated Husband shall wear a Miter,
    Returning, Battle he shall go over the Tyle,
    By five hundred one dignified shall be betrayed,
    Narbon and Salces shall have Oil by the Quintal.

ANNOT.

The first Verse signifieth, that some certain man who was married, shall
be parted from his wife, and shall attain to some great Ecclesiastical
Dignity.

The second Verse is, that in coming back from some place or entreprise,
he shall be met and fought with, and compelled to escape over the Tyles
of a House.

The third Verse is, that a man of great account shall be betrayed by five
hundred of his men.

And the last, that when these things shall come te pass, Narbon and
Salces, which are two Cities of Languedoc, shall reap and make a
great deal of Oil.


XXXV.

    French.

    Et Ferdinand blonde sera descorte,
    Quitter la fleur suivre le Macedon,
    Au grand besoing defaillira sa routte,
    Et marchera contre le Myrmidon.

    English.

    And Ferdinand, having a Troop of faire men,
    Shall leave the flower to follow the Macedonian,
    At his great need his way shall fail him,
    And he shall go against the Myrmidon.

ANNOT.

This Prophecy ought to be understood of an Emperour of Germany, whose
name shall be Ferdinand, who being accompanied with many Germans,
that for the most part are faire haired people shall come and War
against Græcia, which is expressed here by the names of Macedon and
Myrmidon, the first of which is a Countrey, and the last a Nation, both
in Græcia.


XXXVI.

    French.

    Un grand Roy prins entre les mains d’un jeune,
    Non loin de Palques confusion, coup cultre:
    Perpet. cattif temps que foudre en la Hune,
    Trois Freres lors se blesseront & meurtre.

    English.

    A great King taken in the hands of a young one,
    Not far from Easter, confusion, stroke of a knife,
    Shall commit, pittiful time, the fire at the top of the Mast,
    Three Brothers then shall wound one another, and murder done.

ANNOT.

This Prophecy was fulfilled in the year 1560. when Antony of Bourbon
King of Navarre, and his Brother Lewis of Bourbon Prince of
Condé, coming to King Francis II. at Orleans, upon the 29. of
October, the Prince of Condé was put in prison, and the King of
Navarre arrested. The Lord Andrew Fauyn in his History of Navarre,
saith, that the opinion of the Councel was, that the Prince of Condé
should be beheaded, for having been the chief of the conspiracy at
Amboise, and the King of Navarre should be stabbed in the Kings
Chamber by the King himself, assisted by others for that purpose. The
Lady of Montpensier gave notice of it to the King of Navarre, who
being sent for by the King, charged expresly Cattin his waiting man
and an old servant of his Father take a care and preserve his bloody
shirt after his death till his son came to Age, to revenge it upon the
murderers. God be thanked this came not to pass, for the King having
called him, and going about to provoke him with foul words, he answered
so meekly and humbly, that the Kings anger was appeased, where upon the
Duke of Guise going out of the room said, O what a cowardly Prince
is this. These things are expressed in the first and second Verse,
when he saith that a great King should be put in Prison by a young one,
because Antony of Bourbon, though he was not a great King in Lands,
yet he was a great one in courage and prudence. And it was not far from
Easter, sith it was but five months before, viz. from the beginning of
November, to the sixth of April 1591 which was Easterday; the Author
putteth in this circumstance, because the next Easter after, the King of
Navarre was made General of France under the Queen Regent.

He addeth the blow of a Knife, as we have shewed; he also saith a
lasting bad time, which proved very true; moreover, he saith, what
lightning in the Hunt or Topmast, because King Francis died presently
after. In the fourth Verse he saith, that three Brothers shall be hurt
and killed, those three Brothers were Antony of Bourbon King of
Navarre, killed at the Siege at Rouen, the Cardinal of Bourbon, and
Lewis of Bourbon Prince of Condé, killed at the Battle of Jarnac.


XXXVII.

    French.

    Pont & Molins en December versez,
    En si haut lieu montera la Garonne:
    Murs, Edifice, Thoulouse renversez,
    Qu’on ne scaura son lieu coutant matrone.

    English.

    Bridges and Mills in December overturned,
    In so high a place the Garonne shall come,
    Walls, Building, Thoulose overturned,
    So that none shall know its place, so much Matrone.

ANNOT.

Here is foretold a prodigious inundation of the River Garonne, in
the month of December, by which the Walls, Building, and the City
of Thoulouse is threatned to be overturned. The last word of all is
barbarous, and added to make up the rhime.


XXXVIII.

    French.

    L’Entrée de Blaye par Rochelle & l’Anglios,
    Passera outre le grand Æmathien:
    Non loing d’Agen attendra le Gaulois,
    Secours Narbonne deceu par entretien.

    English.

    The coming in at Blaye by Rochel and the English,
    Shall go beyond the great Æmathien,
    Not far from Agen shall expect the French,
    Help from Narbonne deceived by entertainment.

ANNOT.

For the better understanding of this, the hard words must first be made
plain; Blaye is a City upon the River Garonne, and the Port-Town
to Bourdeaux; Rochel is a City upon the same Coast; Agen is a
City in Gascony not far from Bourdeaux, and Narbonne is a City
in Languedoc, by the Mediterranean Sea; Æmathian was formerly the
Countrey of Macedonia, wherein Julius Cæsar and C. Pompeius fought
their last Battle in the Pharsalian Fields, and therefore saith the
Latine Poet Lucanus:

    Bella per Æmathios plusquam civilia campos.

These things being considered the sense is, that there shall be an
Invasion made by the English, to whom those of Rochel shall joyn,
upon the Town of Blaye, which shall proceed as far as Agen, and
that thereabout will be a bloody Encounter between the English and
French, beyond that which was fought in the Æmathian Fields, and that
the succours that should come from Narbonne to the French, shall be
deluded and hindered by the speech and discourse of some.


XXXIX.

    French.

    En Arbissella, Vezema & Crevari,
    De nuit conduits pour Savonne atraper,
    Le vif Gascon, Giury, & la Charry,
    Derrier Mur vieux & neuf Palais grapper.

    English.

    In Arbissella, Vezema and Crevari,
    Being conducted by night to take Savona,
    The quick Gascon, Giury and the Charry,
    Behind old Walls and new Pallace to graple.

ANNOT.

Arbissella is a Town situated by the Sea-side above Savona, going
towards Genoa. Vezema and Crevari are in the Inland Countrey, and a
little further remoted from the Sea then Arbissella. The quick Gascon
was Blasius of Monluc, one of the Valliantest men of his time, who
came from a single Souldier to be Marshal of France. Guiry and la
Charry were two of his Companions. This Stanza doth Prophetically
foretell two things, one is, the design that the Marshal of Brissac,
then Governour of Piemont had upon Savona: the other, the taking of
Pianca by Blasius of Monluc, as to the first, the Lord of Villars
writeth in his Memorials, that the Lord Damzay sent advice to the King,
that the taking of Savona was more probable then any other design,
which signifieth that the Marshal of Brissac had of a long time eyed
that Town, and therefore he sent by night some Troops into those three
little Towns, to see if they could surprise Savona, but the design did
not succeed. The Histories only mention that the Marshal of Brissac went
from Court in the year 1557. with a design to take Savona; but this
stanza speaketh of the same design 1556.

At the same time in the year 1556. the 29. of June Blasius of Monluc,
as he relateth in his Commentaries, did surprise the Town and Fort of
Piance, called in Latine Corsinianum, he had with him the Captain la
Charry, the Captain Bartholomew of Pezero, and the son of Captain
Luzzan. At first the French were beaten back, but the valliant
Monluc did encourage them again by his example, going the first in, and
saying only, follow your Captain.

Which having said, he thrust himself under the Gate, where three or four
men might stand sheltered by the planks of the Fort, and having his Sword
in the left hand, and his dagger in the right, he began to break and cut
the Brick and made a hole, which opening by degrees, he thrust his arm
through, and pulled the gap so strongly, that he caused all the Wall to
fall down upon himself, without being hurt by it. This is the meaning
of the Author in the fourth Verse; when he saith, the quick Gascon was
behind the Wall; In prosecution of this, the Switzers did beat down the
rest of the Wall, and all came into the Town crying, France, France.
Monluc ran presently to the Fort, and with the help of his men took it,
that is the meaning of the Author, when he saith, old and new Pallace
to graple. The old Pallace was adjoining to the Market-place of the
Town, in which the French were prisoners with the Captain Gourgues,
to the number of fifty or sixty tied two and two, and so kept by twenty
Souldiers, whom they did kill as we have said. The new Pallace was
the Fort. The Author used that ancient word grapper, which in the
Provencal languague signifieth, to pull down with ones hands, and in
the contrary sense, to shut and plaister so well some thing, that there
will be a necessity of the help of the hands to open what was shut up.


XL.

    French.

    Pres de Quentin dans la Forest Bourlis,
    Dans l’Abbaye seront Flamands tranchez,
    Les deux puisnez de coups my estourdis,
    Suitte appressée & gardes tous hachez.

    English.

    Near Quentin in the Forrest Bourlis,
    In the Abby the Flemmings shall be slashed,
    The two younger sons half a stonished with blows,
    The followers oppressed, and the Guards all cut in pieces.

ANNOT.

This is a peculiar accident that happened before the taking of the
Town of Saint Quentin by the Spaniard in the year 1557. and fell
out thus. News being come to the King of France, that the powerful
Army of the Spaniard was gone to Besiege St. Quentin, he made all
imaginable diligence to succour it; the Spaniards to hinder the relief
had seized upon an ancient Abby of the Vermandois, which is in the
next Forrest, that was anciently called the Forrest Bourlis, and is at
present called the Forrest of the Abbay Vermandois, called in Latine
Augusta Veromanduorum, builded by an ancient Hungarian Captain called
Vermandig. In process of time it was all ruinated, and only one Abby
left, wherein was the Episcopal See, which afterwards was transferred
into the City of Noyon. After the ruine of this Town, that of St.
Quentin next to it became the chief City of Vermandois; It was named
St. Quentin, because the Emperor Dioclesian having sent St. Quentin
a Roman Senator to be Governour of it, he did convert the Inhabitants
to the Christian Faith, and after he himself did suffer there Martyrdom.

In that Abby a great many Flemmings had intranched themselves, but
the French going to relieve the Town, did force their Trenches and
Fortifications, and in the heat of the fight the two younger Sons of the
Captain being armed Cap a pée, though they were not killed, yet were
astonished with blows they did receive upon their heads, their followers
and Guards being all cut in pieces.


XLI.

    French.

    Le grand Chyren soy saisir d’Avignon,
    De Rome Lettres en miel plein d’amertume,
    Lettre, Ambassade partir de Chanignon,
    Carpentras pris par Duke noir, rouge plume.

    English.

    The great Cheyren shall seize upon Avignon,
    Letters from Rome shall come full of bitterness,
    Letters and Embassies shall go from Chanignon,
    Carpentras taken by a black Duke with a red Feather.

ANNOT.

This did happen lately, viz. some five or six years ago, when the Duke
of Crequy Embassadour at Rome was affronted by the Corses, which
are the Popes Guard: for which the King of France demanded reparation,
and seized upon Avignon, till the Pope granted him that all the said
Corses should be banished, and a Pyramis erected in Rome to the
perpetual infamy of that Nation.


XLII.

    French.

    De Barcelonne, de Gennes & Venise,
    De la Sicile pres Monaco unis,
    Contre Barbare classe prendront la vise,
    Barbar poulsé bien loing jusqu’a Thunis.

    English.

    From Barcelona, from Genoa and Venice,
    From Sicily near Manaco united,
    Against the Barbarian the fleet shall take her aim,
    The Barbarian shall be driven back as far as Thunis.

ANNOT.

The sense of these words is very plain and signifieth onely, that there
will be an union and League between these Towns, viz. Barcelona,
Genoa, Vinice, and the Kingdom of Sicily against the Turks, whom
they shall encounter near Monaco, and put them to flight, and follow
them as far as Tunis.


XLIII.

    French.

    Proche a descendre l’Armée Crucigere,
    Sera guettée par les Ismaelites,
    De tous costez battus par nef Raviere,
    Prompt assailies de dix Galeres d’eslite.

    English.

    The Crucigere Army being about to Land,
    Shall be watched by the Ismaelites,
    Being beaten on all sides by the Ship Raviere,
    Presently assaulted by ten chosen Galleys.

ANNOT.

By the Crucigere Army is understood the Christian Army, because the
word Crucigere signifieth one that beareth a Cross, from the two
Latine words Crux and gero; the Ismaelites are the Turks, who
boast themselves to be descended from Ismael, the son of Abraham
and Agar, the meaning of this is, that the Christians going about to
attempt some landing place, the Turks shall watch them, and set upon
them by Land and Sea, in which Sea fight he mentioneth only ten choice
Galleys, and a notable Ship called Raviere, (if it be not false
printed) I am much of an opinion that this came to pass when Philip
the II. King of Spain made an attempt upon Algiers, by his Admiral
André d’Oria, who had to do with the Moores upon the Land, ready to
receive him, and some part of their fleet that watched him, but cross and
contrary winds caused him to return re infecta.


XLIV.

    French.

    Migrez, migrez de Geneve tretous,
    Saturne d’Or en Fer se changera,
    Le contre Raypoz exterminera tous,
    Avant l’advent le Ciel signes sera.

    English.

    Go forth, go forth out of Geneva all,
    Saturn of gold, shall be changed into Iron,
    They against Raypos shall extermine them all,
    Before it happeneth, the Heavens will shew signs.

ANNOT.

[Sidenote: Called here against Raypos.]

This is a Prophecy concerning Geneva, out of which he warneth every
one to come; his reason is, that the golden Age of that Town shall be
changed into an Iron one; and that there shall be one against Raypos,
that shall extermine them all, before which there shall appear some signs
in Heaven. Now the Author being a rank Papist, it is to be supposed that
he warneth out of Geneva all those of his Faith, because of the coming
of Calvin, whom he foresaw was to come into that Town, and to change
the Government thereof, and to extermine them all, which is to be
understood, in point of Religion, as for what prodigies did precede that
change; I had no time to consult Authors upon it, the judicious Reader
may chance to find them in those that have written of this matter.


XLV.

    French.

    Ne sera soul jamais de demander,
    Grand Mendosus obtiendra son Empire,
    Loing de la Cour fera contremander,
    Piemont, Picard, Paris, Tyrhen le pire.

    English.

    He shall never be weary of asking,
    Great Mendosus shall obtain his dominion,
    Far from the Court he shall cause him to be countermanded,
    Piemont, Picardy, Paris, Tyrhen the worse.

ANNOT.

By Mendosus, is Anagrammatically to be understood Vendosme; but who
is that shall never be weary of asking, or whose Dominion Vendosme
shall have, or what is meant by the last two Verses, passeth my
understanding.


XLVI.

    French.

    Vuidez fuyez de Thoulouse les rouges,
    Du Sacrifice faire expiation,
    Le Chef du mal dessoubs l’ombre des courges,
    Mort estrangler carne omination.

    English.

    Get you gone, run away from Thoulouse ye red ones,
    There shall expiation be made of the Sacrifice,
    The chief cause of the evil under the shade of gourdes,
    Shall be strangled, a presage of the destruction of much flesh.

ANNOT.

This Prophecy doth onely and properly belong to the City of Thoulouse;
and by it are warned all the red ones, that is, all those that usually
wear Red or Scarlet Gowns, as those of the Parliament and the Capitols
to come out of it, because saith he, There shall an expiation be made
of the Sacrifice, meaning that there shall be a great slaughter among
the Citizens, as it did happen at several times, the first Anno 1563.
another time when the first President Durauti, and several other of the
red Gowns were put to death, &c. The two last Verses signifie, that
the chief contriver of this uproar shall be strangled, and many others
besides him.


XLVII.

    French.

    Les soubsignez d’indigne deliverance,
    Et de la multe auront contre advis,
    Change Monarque mis en perrille pence,
    Serrez en cage se verront vis a vis.

    English.

    The underwritten to an unworthy deliverance,
    Shall have from the multitude a contrary advice,
    They shall change their Monarch and put him in peril,
    They shall see themselves shut up in a Cage over against.

ANNOT.

This is plainly to be understood of those Traytors, the delivered and
signed the death of King Charles the I. of blessed Memory, against the
sense and advise of at least three parts of four of the Nation, and who
afterward saw themselves for the most part shut in Prison for this fact
and brought to a shameful end.


XLVIII.

    French.

    La grand Cité d’Occean Maritime,
    Environnée de Marests en Crystal,
    Dans le Solstice hyemal & la prime,
    Sera tentée de vent espouvental.

    English.

    The great Maritime City of the Ocean,
    Encompassed with Chrystaline Fens,
    In the Winter Solstice and in the spring,
    Shall be tempted with fearful wind.

ANNOT.

By the great Maritime City of the Ocean, Encompassed with Crystaline
Fens, is to be understood the City of London, for as for that of
Venice, it is situated upon the Mediterranean or rather Adriatick
Sea: London then is threatned here of a fearful wind, which whether
the Author meaneth for the time that is past now, and that shall come
hereafter I know not, sure I am, that I have within this fifteen years
seen two such winds in London, as I never saw the like any where else;
the first was that day that Olivier the Usurpator died, the other
was about six or seven years ago, caused by the lightning that fell in
Hereford-shire, and did mix with a Western wind and came as far as
London, carrying the tops of houses, and doing then for above 10000.
pounds dammage.


XLIX.

    French.

    Gand & Bruxelles marcheront contre Anvers,
    Senat de Londres mettront a mort leur Roy,
    Le Sel & Vin luy seront a l’envers,
    Pour eux avoir le Regne or desarroy.

    English.

    Gand and Bruxelles shall go against Antwerp,
    The Senat of London shall put their King to death,
    The Salt and Wine shall not be able to do him good,
    That they may have the Kingdom into ruine.

ANNOT.

This Prophecy taken with all its circumstances, and the subject it
treateth of, is the most remarkable of all those that ever Nostradamus
was Author of, for here we see a concatenation of circumstances linked
together, to make it true to any bodies eyes, for first the number of
this Stanza being 49, signifieth the year wherein the King died, for
although by the English account, who begin their year at the 25. of
March, it may be said it was in 48, because it did happen upon the
30th. of January, yet according to the general account of the most
part of the World, the year begin upon the first day of January, so
that the King dying on the 30th. of January, it may be said it was in
the year 1649.

The first Verse signifieth, that at that time there was no good
intelligence between the Cities of Flanders and Brabant, as I
remember very well that there was not, but upon what score, I have
forgotten.

The second Verse is plain to any body that can either read or hear it.

The third Verse by the Salt and Wine, understandeth France, who was
then in War with the Spaniard, and in some divisions among themselves,
so that they could not take the Kings part as to relieve and free him by
force, but sent Embassadours to mediate a composure of the difference.

The fourth Verse intimateth that by reason of the said Wars that were
in France, the said murdering Parliament had liberty to do what they
listed for the bringing the Kingdom into ruine.


L.

    French.

    Mensodus tost viendra a son haut Regne,
    Mettant arriere un peu le Norlaris,
    Le rouge blesme, le masle a l’interregne,
    Le jeune crainte & frayeur Barbaris.

    English.

    Mensodus shall soon come to his high Government,
    Putting a little aside the Norlaris,
    The red, pale, the Male at the interreigne,
    The young fear, and dread barbarisme.

ANNOT.

Mensodus is the Anagramme of Vendosme, by which is meant Antony of
Bourbon Duke of Vendosme, brother to the then Prince of Condé, and
father to Henry IV. Norlaris is the Anagram of Lorrain; now any
body that understandeth any thing in History, knoweth what dissention
and feud there was between the House of Bourbon, and that of Lorrain
in the time of Francis the II. for the House of Bourbon, though next
to the Royal blood, was the least in favour, and those of the House of
Lorrain did Govern all, and had so far prevailed as to have got the
Prince of Condé into their hands, and had him condemned to have his
head cut of, which would have been executed, had not the King that very
day fallen sick of the disease he died of. Now this being understood our
Author will have that Mensodus, which is Vendosme shall lay aside the
Norlaris, that is Lorrein. By the red pale is meant the Cardinal of
Lorrain, brother to the Duke of Guise, who grew pale at this. By the
male at the interreigne is so obscure, that we leave it to the judgement
of the Reader.


LI.

    French.

    Contre les rouges Sectes se banderont,
    Feu, eau, fer, corde, par paix se minera,
    Au point mourir ceux qui machineront,
    Fors un que monde sur tout ruinera.

    English.

    Against the red, Sects shall gather themselves,
    Fire, water, iron, rope, by peace it shall de destroyed,
    Those that shall conspire shall not be put to death,
    Except one, who above all shall undo the World.

ANNOT.

The name of red Sects, may very well be applied to the Protestants of
France, against whom in those days it seemed that fire, Water, Iron and
Rope had conspired, for they were put to death by each one of those fatal
instruments for their Religion sake. This is a lively expression of the
unhappy Massacre of the Protestants in France upon St. Bartholomews
day 1572.

The two last Verses signifie, that all the Contrivers of that Councel,
were of opinion at first to proceed some other way, but only the Duke of
Guise, who was the principal actor in it, and whom our Author saith,
did undo the world; for he was the cause of mischief, not only then but
ofterwards.


LII.

    French.

    La paix sapproche d’un cosié & la guerre,
    Oncques ne fut la poursuite fi grande,
    Plaindre homme & femmene sang Innocent par Terre,
    Et ce sera de France a toute bande.

    English.

    Peace is coming on one side and War on the other,
    There was never so great a pursuing,
    Man, Woman shall bemoan, Innocent blood shall be spilt,
    It shall be in France on all sides.

ANNOT.

This Prophecy was fulfilled in the Reign of Charles the IX. in the
year 1558. when the peace was treated of, and concluded the year after
1559. the War on the other side begun to appear by the raising of the
Protestants, who begun publickly their opinion in the time of Francis
the II. and Charles the IX.

There was never seen such a prosecution of War and of Peace together; for
there was never an estate more embroiled in Wars than that of Charles
the IX. was, nor where Peace was more sought after; for there was nothing
but Wars and treaties of Peace, Men and Women did complain on all
sides, for the wrong and dammages they received from both parties, the
Protestants believing to do God a good service in destroying Images, and
killing Priests and Monks. And the Papists on the other side thinking to
make a sweet Sacrifice unto God, in practising the same cruelties upon
the Protestants, and so in all corners of France every one did set
himself to do evil.


LIII.

    French.

    Le Neron jeune dans les trois Cheminées,
    Sera de Pages vifs pour ardoir ietter,
    Heureux qui loin sera de tels menées,
    Trois de son sang le feront mort guetter.

    English.

    The young Nero in the three Chimneys.
    Shall cause Pages to be thrown to be burnt alive,
    Happy shall he be who shall be far from this doing,
    Three of his own blood shall cause him to be put to death.

ANNOT.

A young Tyrant called here Nero, shall cause some Pages to be burnt
alive in three Chimneys, and afterwards himself shall be put to death by
three of his own blood, this fact savoureth so much of bestial cruelty,
that I cannot belive any Christian Prince can ever be guilty of it.


LIV.

    French.

    Arrivera au port de Corsibonne,
    Pres de Ravenne, qui pillera la Dame,
    En Mer profonde legat de Ulisbone,
    Soubs Roc cachez raviront septante ames.

    English.

    There shall come into the Port of Corsibonne,
    Near Ravenna, those that shall plunder the Lady,
    In the deep Sea shall be the Embassador of Lisbonne,
    The hidden under the Rock, shall carry away seventy Souls.

ANNOT.

The Port of Corsibonne, must of necessity be that of Ancona; first
because there is no Port of the former name near the City of Ravenna.
Secondly, because Ancona is near Ravenna.

By the Lady is meant the Chappel or Church of our Lady of Loretto,
which is threatned here to be plundred by some Turks or Pyrates,
inticed thereunto by the manifold riches that are said to be therein.

The third Verse speaketh of a Portugues Embassador, who it seemeth
shall be drowned or buried in the main Sea.

The fourth Verse giveth warning of some Robbers and Pyrates, very like to
be Turks, who being in Ambuscado, and shrouded among the Rocks by the
Sea side, shall carry away seventy Souls.


LV.

    French.

    L’Horrible guerre qu’en Occident s’appreste,
    L’An ensuivant viendra la Pestilence,
    Si fort terrible, que jeune, viel, ne beste,
    Sang, feu, Mercu. Mars, Jupiter en France.

    English.

    An horrid War is a preparing in the West,
    The next year shall come the Plague,
    So strangly terrible, that neither young nor old, nor beast shall
      escape
    Blood, fire, Mercu. Mars, Jupiter in France.

ANNOT.

That word a preparing in the first Verse, signifieth that he speaketh
of a time, wherein War was a making ready, when he was a writing.

The West, of which our Author speaketh, is not formerly the West which
is Spain, but is the West respectively to his Countrey of Provence,
which is Picardy, Lorrain, and the Countrey of Mets, in all these
Places that are Westerly from Provence, there was great Wars in the
year 1557 in Picardy in the year 1558. at Calais and Thionville,
and at last from the middle of that year to the end of it, were seen two
great Armies of both Kings, which threatned a horrid slaughter, had not
God Almighty provided against it by the treaty of Peace of the 3d. of
April 1559 the year following, which was 1559. there did happen what he
foretelleth, viz., the Plague so strangely terrible to Young, Old, and
Beasts &c.

And in those quarters there was nothing but Fire and Blood; that is,
Massacres and ruines of all sorts, then did Rule in France, the three
Planets of Jupiter, Mars and Mercury, Jupiter and Mercury, for
the peace that was then concluded, and Mars for the War that was then
on foot.

The History of Provence mentioneth, that that Pestilence was called by
the Physitians, Febris erratica, by which within the space of five or
six Months, died almost an infinite number of people.


LVI.

    French.

    Camp prés de Noudam pasiera Goussanville,
    Et a Maiotes laissera son enseigne,
    Convertira en instant plus de mille,
    Cherchant le deux remettre en chaine & legne.

    English.

    A Camp shall by Noudam go beyond Goussanville,
    And shall leave its Ensign at Maiotes,
    And shall in an instant convert above a thousand,
    Seeking to put the two parties in good understanding together.

ANNOT.

These three words of Noudam, Goussanville, and Maiotes are three
little inconsiderable Countrey Towns, situated near one another; the
meaning then of it is, that an Army near Noudam, shall go through
Goussanville, and shall in an instant convert, that is, draw to his
party above a thousand of the contrary party, the business being about
the procuring of a good understanding and amity between two great ones.


LVII.

    French.

    Au lieu de Drux un Roy reposera,
    Et cherchera Loy changeant d’Anatheme,
    Pendant le Ciel si tresfort Tonnera,
    Portée neufve Roy tuera soy mesme.

    English.

    In the place of Drux a King shall rest himself,
    And shall seek Law changing Anatheme,
    In the mean while the Heaven shall Thunder so strongly,
    That a new gate shall kill the King him self.

ANNOT.

Drux is a City in Normandy, near which Henry the IV. got a
memorable victory.

It is said that in that place a King shall rest himself, and shall
endeavour to change Religion, but at that time it shall Thunder and
Lighten so much, that by the fall of a new gate, the King himself shall
be killed.


LVIII.

    French.

    Au costé gauche a lendroit de Vitry,
    Seront guettez les trois rouges de France,
    Tous assommez rouge, noir non meurdry,
    Par les Bretons remis en asseurance.

    English.

    On the left hand over against Vitry,
    The three red ones of France shall be watched for,
    All the red shall be knockt dead, the black not murdered,
    By the Britains set up again in security.

ANNOT.

What is meant here by the three red ones of France is hard to decide,
whether they be Cardinals or Judges; because both wear commonly Scarlet
Gowns, or some Noblemen cloathed in Scarlet, but it seemeth by this
that there shall be a lying in wait for four men, three of which shall
be cloathed in Red, and one in Black, those in Red shall be knockt down
dead, but he in Black shall not, and this is to be done on the left hand,
over against Vitry, which is a City in Champagne.


LIX.

    French.

    A la Ferté prendra la Vidame,
    Nicol tenu rouge quavoit produit la vie,
    La grand Loyse naistra qui fera clame,
    Donnant Bourgongne a Bretons par envie.

    English.

    In the Ferté the Vidame shall take
    Nicol, reputed red, whom life hath produced,
    The great Lewis shall be born, who shall lay claim,
    Giving Burgundy to the Britains, through envy.

ANNOT.

This Stanza wanting both quantity in the Cadence of the Verse, and
Connexion in the sense, sheweth that it is either falsly printed, or else
the Author had no mind it should be understood; we shall only say, the
Ferté is a Town in Champagne. Vidame is a Lords Title in France,
of which there are but four of that sort, and are called in Civil Law
Vicedominus, who by his first Institution, was temporal Judge of the
Bishop; the first of those Vidames or Vicedomini in France, is that
of Amiens, the second of Chartres, the third of Rhemes, and the
fourth of Gerberon.


LX.

    French.

    Conflict Barbare en la Cornere noire,
    Sang espandu trembler la Dalmatie,
    Grand Ismael mettra son promontoire,
    Ranes trembler, secours Lusitanie.

    English.

    A Barbarian fight in the black Corner,
    Blood shall be spilt, Dalmatia shall tremble for fear,
    Great Ismael shall set up his promontory,
    Frogs shall tremble, Portugal shall bring succour.

ANNOT.

This Prophecie foretelleth divers accidents in several places, without
determination of any precise time; as for example, I understand by that
Barbarian conflict, near the black Corner, to be some famous Battle
among the Infidels themselves, some where about the Black Sea; then he
saith, that abundance of Blood shall be spilt, and ~Dalmatia~ shall
tremble, which is a Province belonging to the Venetians, and bordering
upon Græcia; by great Ismael he understandeth the great Sophy of
Persia, whose name hath been often so. By the Frogs it is not easie to
know whether he meaneth France or Spain, for both abound in that kind
of Insects.


LXI.

    French.

    La pille faite a la Coste Marine,
    Incita nova & parens amenez,
    Plusieurs de Malthe par le fait de Messine,
    Estroit serrez seront mal guerdonnez.

    English.

    The plunder made upon the Sea Coast,
    Incita nova and friends brought up,
    Many of Maltha, for the fact of Messina,
    Being close kept, shall be ill rewarded.

ANNOT.

It seemeth that this Plunder made upon the Sea Coast, shall be about
Messina, by the Maltheses, who afterwards shall rue for it, being
taken Prisoners, and severely punished.

As for the expression Incita nova, it is a barbarous derivation of the
Latine, to signifie the stirring of new troubles.


LXII.

    French.

    Au grand de Cheramonagora,
    Seront croisez par rangs tous attachez,
    Le Pertinax Oppi, & Mandragora,
    Raugon d’Octobre le tiers seront laschez.

    English.

    To the great one of Cheramonagora,
    Shall be crossed by Ranges, all tyed up,
    the Pertinax Oppi, and Mandragora,
    Raugon the third of October shall be set loose.

ANNOT.

The word Cheramonagora, is either altogether barbarous and
insignificant, or must be derived from these three Greek words, χεὶρ,
manus, μόνος, folus, and ἄγω, duco, and so it may signifie one than
leadeth along by the hand, in which sense may be understood the King of
France, who alone leadeth his people by the hand, without any help of
Councel.

The second Verse signifieth the Oppositions he shall meet with among his
Neighbours, combined together to hinder him.

By Oppi, he meaneth here Opium, the Juice of Poppies, which he
calleth here Pertinax; because of its pertinacious quality in procuring
sleep, as also Mandragora.

By Raugon, he meaneth some other soporiferous Herb; so that it seemeth
that those three things shall be given upon the third of October to
some body, it seemeth to that Cheramonagora, by whom some understand
the King of France, others Oliver the last usurpator.


LXIII.

    French.

    Plaintes, & pleurs, cris, & grands hurlemens,
    Pres de Narbonne, a Bayonne & en Foix,
    O quels horribles, calamitez, changemens,
    Avant que Mars revolu quelquefois.

    English.

    Complaints and tears, cries, and great howlings,
    Near Narbonne, Bayonne and in Foix,
    O what horrid calamities and changes,
    Before Mars hath made sometimes his revolution.

ANNOT.

Narbonne, Bayonne, and Foix are Towns of Languedoc, a Province in
France; the rest is easie.


LXIV.

    French.

    L’Æmathian passer Monts Pyrenées,
    En Mars Narbon ne fera resistance,
    Par Mer & Terre sera si grand menée,
    Cap. n’ayant Terre seure pour demeurance.

    English.

    The Æmathian shall pass by the Pyrenean Mountains,
    In March Narbon shall make no resistance,
    By Sea and Land he shall make so much ado,
    Cap. shall not have safe ground to live in.

ANNOT.

The Æmathian properly should be the Macedonian, but by it is
understood here the Spaniard, whose Countrey is on one side fenced by
the Pyrenean Mountains; the rest is plain.


LXV.

    French.

    Dedans le coing de Luna viendra rendre,
    Ou sera prins & mis en Terre estrange,
    Les fruits immeurs seront a grand esclandre,
    Grand vitupere, a l’un grande loüange.

    English.

    He shall come into the corner of Luna,
    Where he shall be taken and put in a strange Land,
    The green fruits shall be in great disorder,
    A great shame, to one shall be great praise.

ANNOT.

This Stanza hath relation and connexion to the precedent, and by it ought
to be understood, that the said Æmathian or Spaniard shall come as
far as the corner of Luna, wherein he shall be taken and sent into a
strange Countrey, at which time the green Fruits and Grass shall be much
damaged, for which one of the parties shall receive great shame, and the
other great praise. But what he meaneth by the Corner of Luna, I must
leave the judgement of it to the Reader, for I do ingeniously confess
that I neither know City nor Countrey of that name.


XLVI.

    French.

    Paix, union, sera & changement,
    Estats, Offices, bas hault, & hault bien bas,
    Dresser voiages, le fruit premier, torment,
    Guerre cesser, civils proces, debats.

    English.

    Peace, union, shall be, and mutation,
    States, and Offices, low high, and high low,
    A journey shall be prepared for, the first fruit, pains,
    War shall cease, as also, civil suits, and strifes.

ANNOT.

This is easie to be understood, many interpret it of the downfall of
Rome, at which time all quarrels both of Religion and States would be
laid aside, if the world were all of one mind.


LXVII.

    French.

    Du haut des Monts a lentour de Dizere,
    Port a la Roche Valent, cent assemblez,
    De Chasteau-Neuf, Pierrelate, en Douzere,
    Contre le Crest, Romans soy assemblez.

    English.

    From the top of the Mountains about Dizere
    Gate at the Rock Valence, a hundred gathered together,
    From Chasteau-Neuf, Pierrelate, in Douzere
    Against the Crest, Romans, shall be gathered.

ANNOT.

This is a peculiar Prophecy for the Provinces of Dauphiné and
Languedoc, in which all the Towns and Rivers here mentioned are
situated.


LXVIII.

    French.

    Du Mont Aymar sera noble obscurcie,
    Le mal viendra au joint de Saone & Rhosne,
    Dans bois cachez Soldats jour de Lucie,
    Qui ne fut onc un si horrible Throsne.

    English.

    From Mount Aymar shall proceed a Noble obscurity,
    The evil shall come to the joyning of the Saone and Rhosne,
    Soldiers shall be hid in the Wood on St. Lucy’s day,
    So that there was never such an horrid Throne.

ANNOT.

There is a notable fault in the impression of the first Verse of this
Stanza, for instead of Mount Aymar, it must be Montlimar, which is
a Town in Provence or Languedoc, situated by the River Rhosne,
the sense therefore of this, is, that from Montlimar shall proceed
some notable and obscure design, and that shall reach as far as Lyons,
which is the City where the Saone and Rhosne meet, and that for that
purpose, there shall be hidden a great many Souldiers in a Wood on St.
Lucy’s day, which is the 13th. of December.


LXIX.

    French.

    Sur le Mont de Bailly & la Bresse,
    Seront cachez de Grenoble les fiers,
    Outre Lyon, Vien. cula si grand gresle,
    Langoult en Terre n’en cessara un tiers.

    English.

    Upon the Mount of Bailly, and the Countrey of Bresse,
    Shall be hidden the fierce ones of Grenoble,
    Beyond Lyons, Vienna, upon them shall fall such a hail,
    That languishing upon the ground, the third part shall not be left.

ANNOT.

The Mount Bailly, and the Countrey of Bressia, are by Savoy, in
which place (our Author saith) the fierce ones; that is, the stout men of
Grenoble, the chief Town of Dauphiné, shall be hidden, and that such
a Hail shall fall upon them, as not one third part shall be left.


LXX.

    French.

    Harnois trenchans dans les flambeaux cachez,
    Dedans Lyon le jour du Sacrement,
    Ceux de Vienne seront tretous hachez,
    Par les Cantons Latins, Mascon eront.

    English.

    Sharp Weapons shall be hidden in burning Torches,
    In Lyons the day of the Sacrament,
    Those of Vienna shall be all cut to pieces,
    By the Latin Cantons, after the example of Mascon.

ANNOT.

This foretelleth a notable Treason that shall be acted at Lyons, upon
the Sacraments day, otherwise called Corpus Christi day, upon which the
Roman Catholicks are wont to make a Procession with the Sacrament about
the Town, with abundance of burning Torches, of fearful bigness, insomuch
that some (as at Angeirs) require 20 or 24 men to carry them, in those
Torches (our Author saith) shall Weapons be hidden, by means of which the
fact shall be committed. The rest is easie.


LXXI.

    French.

    Au lieux Sacrés, animaux veus a Trixe,
    Avec celuy qui nosera le jour,
    A Carcassonne pour disgrace propice,
    Sera posé pour plus ample sejonr.

    English.

    In the Sacred places, Animals shall be seen at Trixe,
    With him that shall not dare in the day,
    In Carcassonne for a favourable disgrace,
    He shall be set to make a longer stay.

ANNOT.

Whether the Author did understand himself here I know not, I am sure I do
not; Carcassonne is a City of Languedoc, and Trixe is a barbarous
word.


LXXII.

    French.

    Encor seront les Saints Temples pollus,
    Et expilez par Senat Tholosain,
    Saturne deux trois Siecles revolus,
    Dans Auril, May, gens de nouveau Levain.

    English.

    Once more shall the Holy Temples be polluted,
    And depredated by the Senate of Thoulouze,
    Saturn two three Ages finished,
    In April, May, people of a new Leaven.

ANNOT.

This is, when the Planet Saturn hath finished twice three Ages;
that is, 600 years from the time that this Prophecy was written, then
the Senates of Thoulouze, being men of a new Leaven (meaning being
Protestants) shall cause the Romish Churches to be polluted and
depredated in the Months of April and May.


LXXIII.

    French.

    Dans Foix entrez Roy Cerulée Turban,
    Et regnera moins evolu Saturne,
    Roy Turban Blanc, Bizance cœur ban,
    Sol, Mars, Mercure, pres la Hurne.

    English.

    In Foix shall come a King with a Blew Turbant,
    And shall Reign before Saturn is revolved,
    Then a King with a White Turbant shall make Bizance to quake,
    Sol, Mars, Mercury, being near the top of the Mast.

ANNOT.

Foix is a Countrey of France, near Gascony, where the Author saith,
a King with a Blew Turbant shall come, and shall govern less then an Age,
that is 100 years, after which another King with a White Turbant shall
come, and shall Conquer Bizance (which in Latine is Constantinople)
the Blew or Green Turbant is attributed to the great Turk, and the
White one to the King of France, by whom the Turks have a Prophecie,
their Monarchy shall be subverted.


LXXIV.

    French.

    Dans la Cité de Fertsod homicide,
    Fait & fait multe Bœuf arant ne macter,
    Retour encore aux honneurs d’Artemide,
    Et a Vulcan corps morts sepulturer.

    English.

    In the City of Fertsod one murdered,
    Causeth a Fine to be laid for killing a plowing Oxe,
    There shall be a return of the honours due to Artemide,
    And Vulcan shall bury dead bodies.

ANNOT.

What is that City of Fertsod, is hard to guess, there being none of
this name in Europe that I know. The rest of the words are plain,
though the sense be abstruce enough, therefore we shall leave them to the
liberty of the Reader.


LXXV.

    French.

    De l’Ambraxie & du pais de Thrace,
    Peuple par Mer, Mal, & secours Gaulois,
    Perpetuelle en Provence la Trace,
    Avec vestiges de leur Coustumes & Loix.

    English.

    From Ambraxia, and from the Countrey of Thracia,
    People by Sea, Evil, and French succours,
    The Trace of it shall be perpetual in Provence,
    The footsteps of their Customs and Laws remaining.

ANNOT.

What Countrey this Ambraxia should be, is yet unknown, for my part I
take it to be a forged word, as for Thracia it is a Countrey between
Hungary and Greece.

Observe here that Evil is not an Epithete, to either People or Sea, but a
word of admiration by it self, as malum in Latine, which is called vox
admirantis.


LXXVI.

    French.

    Avec le noir Rapax & sanguinaire,
    Yssu du peaultre de l’inhumain Neron,
    Emmy deux Fleuves main gauche Militaire,
    Sera meurtry par Joyn Chaulveron.

    English.

    With the Black and bloody Rapax,
    Descended from the paultry of the inhumane Nero,
    Between two Rivers, on the left Military hand,
    He shall be murdered by Joyne Caulveron.

ANNOT.

This Prophecie portendeth the death of a black, bloody, and ravenous man
(which in Latine is Rapax) who shall be murdered between two Rivers, by
one whose proper name shall be Joyne Chaulveron.


LXXVII.

    French.

    Le Regne prins le Roy conviera,
    La Dame prinse a mort jurez a sort,
    La vie a Royne Fils on desniera,
    Et la pellix au fort de la consort.

    English.

    The Kingdom being taken, the King shall invite,
    The Lady taken to death,
    The Life shall be denyed unto the Queens Son,
    And the Pellix shall be at the height of the Consort.

ANNOT.

You must observe, that there is a word false printed, which is Pellix,
instead of which should be Pellex, which in Latine signifieth a Whore
or Concubine.

The sense therefore of this is, that a certain King having taken another
Kingdom, shall put the Queen of it to death, as also her own Son, after
which, he shall make his Concubine Queen.


LXXVIII.

    French.

    La Dame Grecque de Beauté laydique,
    Heureuse faite de proces innumerable,
    Hors translatée au Regne Hispanique,
    Captive prinse mourir mort miserable.

    English.

    The Græcian Lady of exquisite Beauty,
    Made happy from innumerable quarrels,
    Being translated into the Spanish Kingdom,
    Shall be made a Prisoner, and die a miserable death.

ANNOT.

This Stanza is concerning the Lady Elizabeth of France, Daughter to
Henry the II. and Sister to Charles the IX. who being promised first
to Don Carlo Infante of Spain, was afterwards Married to his Father
Philip the II. at which the young man being vexed and discontented,
began to raise combustions in the State, for which, and his too much
familiarity with his Mother in Law, he was strangled by his Fathers
command, and she poisoned.


LXXIX.

    French.

    Le Chef de Classe par fraude, stratageme,
    Fera timides sortir de leurs Galeres,
    Sortis meurdris chef renieux de Cresme,
    Puis par l’Embusche luy rendront les salaires.

    English.

    The Commander of a Fleet by fraud and stratagem,
    Shall cause the fearful ones to come forth of their Galleys,
    Come out murdered, chief renouncer of Baptism,
    After that by an Ambuscado they’l give him again his salary.

ANNOT.

The two first Verses are plain, the third signifieth, that these fearful
ones being come out of their Galleys, part of them shall be murdered, and
among them the Captain, a renouncer of his Baptism, or Renegado, and the
rest afterwards by an Ambuscado, shall requite in the same Coin those
that had used them so.


LXXX.

    French.

    Le Duc voudra les siens exterminer,
    Envoyera les plus forts, lieux estranges,
    Par tyrannie Bize & Luc ruiner,
    Puis les Barbares sans Vin feront Vendanges.

    English.

    The Duke shall endeavour to exterminate his own,
    And shall send away the strongest of them into remote places,
    He shall also ruinate Bize and Luc,
    The Barbarians shall make Vintage without Wine.

ANNOT.

There is a great fault in the impression of the French Copy in this
Stanza, which maketh the sense altogether inexplicable, it must then in
stead of Bize and Luc, be written Pise and Lucques, which are two
Towns in Italy, near the Duke of Florence’s Dominions; one of these
Towns, viz. Pisa he hath taken already, and from a Common-Wealth made
it subject to himself; the other though several times attempted by him,
hath preserved its liberty to this day. The last Verse signifieth, that
after this is come to pass, the Barbarians, that is, the Florentins
shall make Vintage without Wine; that is, shall plunder and spoil at
their pleasure.


LXXXI.

    French.

    LeRoy rusé entendra ses Embusches,
    De trois quartiers Ennemis assaillir,
    Un nombre estrange Larmes de coqueluches,
    Viendra Lamprin du traducteur faillir.

    English.

    The crafty King shall hear of his Ambuscadoes,
    And shall assail his Enemies on three sides,
    A strange number of Friers, mens Tears,
    Shall cause Lamprin to desert the Traitor.

ANNOT.

The only difficulty here is to know who that Lamprin should be, who
shall be diverted from following a Traitor (which he meaneth here by the
French word Traducteur) and shall be diverted from it by the Tears of
Fryers, which are meant here by the ancient French word Coqueluches,
which signifieth a Fryers Cool or Capuchon.


LXXXII.

    French.

    Par le Deluge & pestilence forte,
    La Cité grande de long temps Assiegée,
    La Sentinelle & Garde de main morte,
    Subite prinse mais de nul outragée.

    English.

    The great City having been long Besieged,
    By an Innundation and violent Plague,
    The Sentinal and Watch being surprised,
    Shall be taken on a sudden, but hurt by no body.

ANNOT.

This is very plain, if by the great City you understand Paris, who is
subject to frequent Innundations and Plagues.


LXXXIII.

    French.

    Sol Vingt de Taurus, si fort terre tremblera,
    Le grand Theatre remply ruinera,
    L’Air, Ciel, & Terre, obscurcir & troubler,
    Lors l’Infidele Dieu, & Saints voguera.

    English.

    The Sun being in the 20th of Taurus, the Earth shall so quake,
    That it shall fill and ruinate the great Theater
    The Air, the Heaven, & the Earth shall be so darkened, and troubled,
    That the unbelievers shall call upon God, and his Saints.

ANNOT.

This famous Earth-quake having not yet happened in Europe, it is like
to happen within few years, for our Authors Prophecies (by his own
confession) do not extend further than the year 1700.


LXXXIV.

    French.

    Roy exposé parfaira l’Hecatombe,
    Apres avoir trouve son Origine,
    Torrent ouvrir de Marbre & Plomb la Tombe,
    D’un grand Romain d’Enseigne Medusin.

    English.

    The King exposed shall fulfill the Hecatombe,
    After he hath found out his Offspring,
    A Torrent shall open the Sepulcher, made of Marble and Lead,
    Of a great Roman, with a Medusean Ensign.

ANNOT.

This Prophecie is divided into two parts, The first two Verses are
concerning a King, who shall perform the Funeral Rites and Ceremonies
to his Parents, when he is come to the knowledge of them, having been
exposed for lost before.

The two last Verses are concerning an ancient Sepulcher of a Roman,
that shall be digged up and found out by a Torrent, and the Arms of the
said Roman shall be something like the head of Medusa, whose Hairs
were Serpents, and was so fearful to behold, that by seeing of it, the
beholders were turned into stones.


LXXXV.

    French.

    Passer Guenne, Languedoc, & le Rhosne,
    D’Agen tenants, de Marmande & la Reole,
    D’Ouvrir par foy parroy, Phocen tiendra son Throne,
    Conflict aupres Saint Pol de Manseole.

    English.

    They shall pass over Gascony, Languedoc, and the Rhosne,
    From Agen keeping Marmande, and the Reole,
    To open the Wall by Faith, Phocen shall keep his Throne,
    A Battle shall be by St. Paul of Manseole.

ANNOT.

The whole of this Prophecie signifieth no more, but that an Army shall
pass through all these places, and that at last there will be a Battle
fought by that place, called St. Paul de Manseole.


LXXXVI.

    French.

    Du Bourg la Reyne parviendront droit a Chartres,
    Et feront pres du Pont Antony pose,
    Sept pour la paix cauteleux comme Martres,
    Feront entrée d’Armée a Paris clause.

    English.

    From Bourg la Reyne they shall come straight to Chartres,
    And shall make a stand near Pont Antony,
    Seven for Peace as crafty as Martres,
    They shall enter in Paris besieged with an Army.

ANNOT.

Bourg la Reyne is a little town within six Miles of Paris, Chartres
is the chief City of the Province Beausse, Pont Antony is a little
Town between them both, so that the sense of the whole is this, that
seven men, crafty like Martres (which are those Russia Foxes that
afford the richest Furres, called Martres Zibellines) shall go from
Bourg la Reyne to Chartres, making a little stay at Pont Antony,
and then shall come with an Army into Paris, which shall be besieged at
that time, I believe this Prophecy is come to pass already in the time of
the Civil Wars of France; but for want of the History I could not quote
the time.


LXXXVII.

    French.

    Par la Forest du Touphon essartée
    Par Hermitage sera posé le Temple,
    Le Duc d’Estampes par sa ruse inventée,
    Du Montlehery Prelat donra exemple.

    English.

    By the Forrest Touphon cut off,
    By the Hermitage shall the Temple be set,
    The Duke of Estampes by his invented trick,
    Shall give example to the Prelat of Montlehery.

ANNOT.

Here is a fault in the Impression, for instead of Touphon, it must be
written Torfou, which is a Forrest some 30 Miles from Paris towards
Beausse, near which is seated the Town of Montlehery, in the said
Forrest is seated an Hermitage, and not far from thence the City of
Estampes, which carryeth the Title of Dutchy; so that the sense of
it is this, that this Forrest being cut off (as it is now for the most
part) in the place where that Hermitage was, shall be built a Church or
Convent, as it is now Cælestins friars, called Marcoussy, and that
the said Hermitage shall be taken from the jurisdiction of the Town of
Montlehery, under which it was before.


LXXXVIII.

    French.

    Calais, Arras, secours a Theroanne,
    Paix & semblant simulera l’escoute,
    Soulde d’Allobrox descendra par Roane,
    Destornay peuple qui defera la routte.

    English.

    Calais, Arras, shall give succours to Theroanne,
    Peace or the like, shall dissemble the hearing,
    Souldiers of Allobrox shall descend by Roane,
    People perswaded, shall spoil the March.

ANNOT.

This Prophecy did happen in the time of Henry the II. King of France,
about the year 1559.

The last Verse saith, that those two Towns Calais and Arras gave
succours to Theroanne, that is to the Countrey where Therouenne was
seated, which was destroyed by Charles the V. Emperour. This Countrey
was called Ponthieu, of which Therouenne was the chief Town.

The second Verse doth determine the time whereabout this came to pass,
when he saith, peace or the like shall dissemble the hearing; because
in the year 1556. in the beginning of February there was a Truce for
five years between the two Crowns of France and Spain, concerning
the Low Countreys, and this Truce signified not much, nor was well
cemented, so that the Author saith, Peace or the like shall dissemble
the hearing; that is, shall fain not to hear that the Cardinal Caraffa
did endeavour in France to have the Truce broken.

The third Verse is obscure, because of a fault in the Impression,
wherein they have put Ronane instead of Noanne, that is Hannone by
transposition of letters, but that being corrected, the Verse is clear,
supposing that Philibertus Emanuel Duke of Savoy was General of the
Army, against France in the Low-Countreis, and wandering about to do
some notable exploit, he came down through the Province of Hainault,
called in Latine Hannonia, and came to Mariembourg, as if he would
have Besieged it, but after some light skirmishes he laid Siege to
Rocroy, and this is the meaning of the third Verse, when he saith,
Souldiers of ~Allobrox~ shall descend by ~Noanne~, that is, Souldiers
in the Army of the Duke of Savoy, which in Latine is Allobrox, came
down to Mariembourg, and turned back again to Rocroy.

The fourth Verse mentioneth what did happen at the Siege of Rocroy;
that place being not yet very well fortified; the King was unwilling to
put any of his best Souldiers therein, but the Duke of Nevers undertook
the defence of it, which he did really and gloriously perform, in so
much, that the Duke of Savoy was compelled to raise up the Siege, and
going back towards St. Quentin, he took Vervins by storm, and gave
the booty of it to his Souldiers, who took heart upon it, having been
much discouraged before by the resistance of the Duke of Nevers. This
is the sense of the fourth Verse, People persuaded shall spoil the
march; that is, the people of Rocroy persuaded to hold out by the
courage and presence of the Duke of Nevers, spoiled the march that the
Duke of Savoy had propounded to himself, insomuch, that raising the
Siege he went to Vervins, and from thence to St. Quentin.


LXXXIX.

    French.

    Sept ans Philip fortune prospere,
    Rabaissera des Barbares l’effort,
    Puis son midy perplex rebours affaire,
    Jeune Ogmion abysmera son fort.

    English.

    Philip shall have seven years of prosperous fortune,
    Shall beat down the attempt of the Barbarians,
    Then in his Noon he shall be perplexed and have untoward business,
    Young Ogmion shall pull down his strength.

ANNOT.

This Stanza was made concerning Philip the II. King of Spain, who for
the first seven years that he came to his Crown, had prosperous fortune,
did brave exploits against the Barbarians, and chiefly in the person
of his Brother Don Juan of Austria, who got the memorable Battle of
Lapantho against the Turks, but in the middle of his Noon, that
is of his Age, fell into great perplexities and cross businesses, being
constrained to put his onely son Don Carla to death, and to poison his
wife and after that never prospered, when young Ogmion (that is Henry
IV. King of France) came to the Crown.


XC.

    French.

    Un Capitaine de la grand Germanie,
    Se viendra rendre par simulé secours,
    Au Roy des Roys, aide de Pannonie,
    Que sa revoke fera de sang grand cours.

    English.

    A Captain of the great Germany,
    Shall come to yield himself with a fained help,
    Unto the King of Kings, help of Hungary,
    So that his revolt shall cause a great bloodshed.

ANNOT.

Pannonia in Latine is Hungary, there is nothing hard in this, unless
it be what he meaneth by the King of Kings, whether it be the great Turk
or the Emperour.


XCI.

    French.

    L’Horrible peste Perynthe & Nicopole,
    Le Chersonese tiendra & Marceloine,
    La Thessalie naistera l’Amphipole,
    Mal incogneu & le refus d’Antoine.

    English.

    The horrid pestilence shall seize upon Perynthe and Nicopolis,
    The Chersonese and Marceloine,
    It shall waste Thessalia and Amphipolis,
    An unknown evil and the refusal of Antony.

ANNOT.

There is several faults in the impression here, for instead of
Perynthe, it must be Corinth. For Marceloine, it must be
Macedoine: the substance of the whole is, that there shall be a great
plague in all these Countries of Asia. The refusal of Antony is
foisted here to make up the rime with Macedony.


XCII.

    French.

    Le Roy voudra dans Cité neufve entrer,
    Par ennemis expugner l’on viendra,
    Captif libere, faulx dire & perpetrer,
    Roy dehors estre, loin d’ennemis tiendra.

    English.

    The King shall desire to enter into the new City,
    With foes they shall come to overcome it,
    The Prisoner being free, shall speak and act falsly,
    The King being gotten out, shall keep far from enemies.

ANNOT.

The sense of all these words so ill jointed, is no more but that a
certain King shall desire to enter into a new City, and there they shall
come and Besiege him, where he shall both act and speak deceitfully to
get his liberty, which having obtained, shall keep far from his foes.


XCIII.

    French.

    Les ennemis du Fort bien esloignez,
    Par Chariots conduits le Bastion,
    Par sur les Murs de Bourges esgrongnez,
    Quand Hercules battra l’Hæmathion.

    English.

    The enemies being a good way from the Fort,
    Shall upon Wagons be conducted to the Bulwark,
    From the top of Bourges Walls they shall be cut less,
    When Hercules shall beat the Hæmathion.

ANNOT.

Bourges is the chief City of a Province in France called Berry.

There is nothing difficult in this, but onely what he meaneth by
Hercules beating the Æmathion, unless by Hercules he meaneth the
French, and by Æmathion the Spaniard.


XCIV.

    French.

    Foibles Galeres seront unis ensemble,
    Ennemis faux, le plus fort en rempart,
    Foible assailies Wratislavie tremble;
    Lubeck & Mysne tiendront Barbare part.

    English.

    Weak Galleys shall be united together,
    False enemies, the strongest shall be fortified,
    Weak assaults, and yet Breslaw quaketh for fear,
    Lubeck and Misne shall take the part of the Barbarians.

ANNOT.

Breslaw, Lubeck and Misne, are three Cities of Germany; the rest
is plain.


XCV.

    French.

    Le nouveau fait conduira l’exercite,
    Proche apamé jusque aupres du Rivage,
    Tendant secours de Melanoise eslite,
    Duc yeux privé, a Milan fer de Cage.

    English.

    The new man shall lead up the Army,
    Near Apamé, till near the Bank,
    Carrying succours of choice Forces from Milan,
    The Duke deprived of his eyes, and an Iron Cage at Milan.

ANNOT.

Apamé is a barbarous word, at least I cannot tell what language it is,
the rest is plain enough, and signifieth that a Duke shall be deprived of
his eyes, and shall be put in an Iron Cage at Milan.


XCVI.

    French.

    Dans Cité entrer exercite desniée,
    Duc entrera par persuasion,
    Aux foibles portes clam Armée amenée,
    Mettront feu, mort, de sang effusion.

    English.

    The Army being denied the entrance of the City,
    The Duke shall enter by persuasion,
    To the weak Gates, clam the Army being brought,
    Shall put all to fire and sword.

ANNOT.

Clam here is in Latine præposition, signifying secretly; the rest is
easie.


XCVII.

    French.

    De Mer Copies en trois parts divisées,
    A la seconde les Vivres failliront,
    Desesperez cherchant Champs Elisées,
    Premiers en breche entrez victoire auront.

    English.

    A Fleet being divided into three parts,
    The victuals will fail the second part,
    Being in despaire they’l seek the Elysian Fields,
    And entring the breach first, shall obtain victory.

ANNOT.

A Fleet being divided into three parts, the second division shall fall
into want of victuals, for which being desperate, they shall attempt the
Town of the enemy, and shall enter it by the breach, and get the victory.


XCVIII.

    French.

    Les affligez par faute d’un seul taint,
    Contremenant a partie opposite,
    Aux Lygonois mandera que contraint,
    Seront de rendre le grand chef de Molite.

    English.

    The afflicted want of one only died,
    Carrying against the opposite part,
    Shall send word to those of Lyon, they shall be compelled,
    To surrender the great chief of Molite.

ANNOT.

This is the most nonsensical thing that is in all the Book, for neither
the words nor the connexion is intelligible, therefore it being so much
out of the common road of our Author, I am apt to believe that it was at
first very falsly printed, and that those that came after, were loth to
alter it for the respect of antiquity.


XCIX.

    French.

    Vent Aquilon fera partir le Siege,
    Par murs jetter cendres, chaulx, & poussiere,
    Par pluye apres qui leur sera bien piege,
    Dernier secours encontre leur Frontiere.

    English.

    The North wind shall cause the Siege to be raised,
    They shall throw ashes, lime, and dust,
    By a rain after that shall be a trap to them,
    It shall be the last succours against their Frontiere.

ANNOT.

Here is described a notable stratagem of a Besieged Town, who against
rainy weather cast so much ashes, lime and dust, that the rain coming
thereupon, it made such a mire, as the Besiegers were not able to assault
it.


C.

    French.

    Navale pugne nuict sera superée,
    Le feu, aux Naves a l’Occident ruine,
    Rubriche neuve, la grand néf colorée,
    Ire a vaincu, & victoire en bruine.

    English.

    In a Sea-fight, night shall be overcome,
    By fire, to the Ships of the West ruine shall happen,
    A new stratagem, the great Ship coloured,
    Anger to the vanquished, and victory in a Mist.

ANNOT.

He foretelleth of a Sea-fight in the night, wherein by the light of the
burning Ships night shall be overcome, the Ships that came from the West
shall be worsted, and by a stratagem of a great Ship painted in colours,
anger shall remain to the vanquished, and the victory shall be got in a
Mist.




THE PROPHECIES OF Michael Nostradamus.

CENTURY X.


I.

    French.

    A l’Ennemy, l’ennemy foy promise,
    Ne se tiendra, les captifs retenus,
    Prins preme mort & le reste en chemise,
    Donnant le reste pour estre secourus.

    English.

    To the enemy, the enemy faith promised,
    Shall not be kept, the prisoners shall be detained,
    The first taken, put to death, and the rest stripped,
    Giving the remnant that they may be succoured.

ANNOT.

These words are plain, though the sense be a little intricated, and the
contents being of small concernments, deserve no further explanation.


II.

    French.

    Voile Gallere Voile nef Cachera,
    La grand Classe viendra sortir la moindre,
    Dix Naves proches le tourneront poulser,
    Grand vaincüe, unies a soy joindre.

    English.

    The Galley and the Ship shall hide their Sails,
    The great Fleet shall make the little one to come out,
    Ten Ships near hand, shall turn and push at it,
    The great being vanquished, they shall unite together.

ANNOT.

These are some particularities of a Sea fight between a great Fleet and a
small one, wherein he saith, that some had hid their Sails, belike they
were unwilling to come out of the Harbour and to fight; but he saith,
that the great Fleet will compel the little one to come out; but ten
great Ships will come to help the little Fleet, and after the great one
hath been overcome, will joyn themselves to the little Fleet.


III.

    French.

    En apres cinq troupeau ne mettra hors,
    Un fuitif pour Penelon laschera,
    Faux murmurer secours venir par lors,
    Le Chef le Siege lors abandonnera.

    English.

    After that, five shall not put out his flock,
    He’l let loose a runnaway for Penelon,
    There shall be a false rumour, succours shall come then,
    The Commander shall forsake the Siege.

ANNOT.

This Stanza is either nonsensical or falsely printed, and what he meaneth
by Penelon, is utterly unknown.


IV.

    French.

    Sur la minuit conducteur de l’Armée,
    Se sauvera subit esvanovy,
    Sept ans apres la fame non blasmée,
    A son retour ne dira oncq ouy.

    English.

    About midnight the leader of the Army,
    Shall save himself, vanishing suddenly,
    Seven years after his fame shall not be blamed
    And at his return he shall never say yea.

ANNOT.

This is plain of a General of an Army, who shall forsake his Army,
and save himself, and yet seven years after when he cometh back, his
reputation shall be as clear, as if he never had committed such an errour.


V.

    French.

    Albi & Castres feront nouvelle ligue,
    Neuf Arriens, Lisbonne, & Portuguez,
    Carcas. Thoulouze, consumeront leur brigue
    Quand chef neuf monstre de Lauraguez.

    English.

    Albi and Castres shall make a new league,
    Nine Arriens, Lisbonne, and Portuguez,
    Carcas. Thoulouse, shall make an end of their confederacy;
    When the new chief shall come from Lauragais.

ANNOT.

Albi, Castres, Carcassonne, and Thoulouse, are Cities of
Languedock, which our Author saith, will enter into a confederacy among
themselves, and joyn with Lisbon and the Portuguez, and this shall
happen when the general of the Army, shall be one born in Lauragais,
which is another of the same Province.


VI.

    French.

    Gardon a Nismes eaux si haut desborderont,
    Qu’on cuidera Deucalion renaistre,
    Dans le Colosse la pluspart fuiront,
    Vesta Sepulchre feu esteint apparoistre.

    English.

    Gardon at Nismes, waters shall overflow so high,
    That they’l think that Deucalion is born again,
    Most of them will run into the Colossus,
    And a Sepulchre, and fire extinguished, shall appear.

ANNOT.

Near Nismes there is the River called Gardon, which cometh from St.
Romans, and dischargeth it self into the Rhosne at Beaucaire, there
is to be seen in that City abundance of Antiquitez, which the Goths
had built 1150. years before; there is also many Roman Antiquities,
as an Amphitheater, so well builded that neither the Goths nor the
Saracens, nor Attila, nor Charles Martel, with all their power,
could not utterly demolish it. The Author nameth it Colossus, because
its building appeared like a Colossus for solidity.

There is also an ancient Temple which is called the Fountain, builded
as a Quadrangle, and supported by two rows of great Pillars, which at
present is a Church of Nuns.

This being supposed, the River of Gardon did overflow so much, that
its Waters joyning with that of a Flood that happened there the ninth
of September 1557. every one thought that Deucalion had been born
again. The Author saith this; because in the fables of the ancients.
Deucalion is thought to be the Author of the Flood which Ovid
mentioneth. During this Flood which was like to overflow the Town, as
well as the Countrey, many did retire themselves into that Amphitheater.

And in that ancient Temple of the Fountain, the Waters overthrowing
a great many old buildings did discover abundance of Antiquities, and
amongst the rest one of those Lamps that burneth always, in the Sepulchre
of a Vestal, which went out as soon as it felt the fresh Air.

In confirmation of this, the History of Provence saith, that the storm
began about five of the Clock in the Morning, and lasted till Eight
of the Clock at night, and that these waters did uncover abundance of
Antiquities that were hidden 1100. years before, as Pillars, Portico’s,
Medals, Jasper-stones, and serpentine-stones, pieces of broken Vessels,
Epitaphs, lodging Rooms, and Caves, and all other things that use to be
found in the ruines of a Palace.

There was also heard in the Air Dogs barking, Pillars of fire, Armed men
fighting, and were seen two Suns in the Clouds of the Colour of Blood,
all which were the sad presages of the Civil Wars of France presently
after, and chiefly that of Provence.

The ninth Century in the ninth Stanza, speaketh almost the same, and
sheweth that Nismes shall perish by Water.


VII.

    French.

    Le grand conflict qu’on appreste a Nancy,
    L’Æmathien dira tout je soubmets,
    L’Isle Britane par Vin Sel en solcy,
    Hem. mi. deux Phi. long temps ne tiendra Mets.

    English.

    A great War is preparing at Nancy,
    The Æmathien shall say I submit to all,
    The British Island shall be put in care by Salt and Wine,
    Hem. mi. two Phi. shall not keep Mets long.

ANNOT.

Nancy is the chief City of Lorrain, and by the Æmathien is
understood the French, the British Isle is England, which is said
here, shall come into great distress by Salt and Wine, because the
Countrey aboundeth in those two Commodities. The last Verse I do not
understand, save that Mets is a great City in Lorrain.


VIII.

    French.

    Index & Poulse parfondera le front
    De Senegalia le Comte a son Fils propre,
    La Myrnamée par plusieurs de plain front,
    Trois dans sept jours blessez mort.

    English.

    Index and Poulse shall break the forehead,
    Of the Son of the Earl of Senegalia,
    The Myrnamée by many at a full bout,
    Three within seven days shall be wounded to death.

ANNOT.

Senegalia is a Town in Italy, all what can be gathered out of the
obscurity of this Stanza, is, that the son of the Earl of that Town shall
have his forehead broken, and within seven days after, three more shall
be wounded to death.


IX.

    French.

    De Castilon figuieres jour de brune,
    De femme infame naistra Souverain Prince,
    Surnum de chausses per hume luy posthume,
    Onc Roy ne fut si pire en sa Province.

    English.

    Out of Castilon figuieres upon a misty day,
    From an infamous woman shall be born a Soveraign Prince,
    His surname shall be from Breeches, himself a posthume,
    Never a King was worse in his Province.

ANNOT.

Castilon figuieres is a petty Town in Provence, in which he saith
that a Soveraign Prince shall be born of an infamous Woman, and shall be
a posthume, which in Latine signifieth one that is born after his Fathers
death; he saith also that his name shall be derived from Breeches and
that never a King was worse in his Countrey, whether by worse, he meaneth
in manners or fortune, I know not.


X.

    French.

    Tasche de murdre, enormes Adulteres,
    Grand ennemy de tout le genre humain,
    Que sera pire qu’ayeulx, Oncles ne Pere,
    En fer, feu, eau, sanguin & inhumain.

    English.

    Endeavour of Murder, enormous Adulteries,
    A great enemy of all mankind,
    That shall be worse then Grand-father, Uncle, or Father,
    In Iron, fire, water, bloody and inhumane.

ANNOT.

This Stanza as well as the next hath relation to the precedent, making
mention what a wicked person shall that Posthume be of which he spoke
before.


XI.

    French.

    Dessoubs Jonchere du dangereux passage,
    Fera passer le posthume sa bande,
    Les Monts Pyrens passer hors son bagage,
    De Parpignan courira Duc a Tende.

    English.

    Below Joncheres dangerous passage,
    The posthume shall cause his Army to go over,
    And his Baggage to go over the Pyrenean Mountains,
    A Duke shalt run from Perpignan to Tende.

ANNOT.

This is still concerning the same posthume or Bastard, who shall cause
his Army to pass at Jonchere, and his Bagage to go over the Pyrenean
Mountains, which parts Spain from France, and that upon the fear
of him a Duke shall run from Perpignan, which is the chief City of
Roussillon to Tende, which is a little Town in Provence.


XII.

    French.

    Esleu en Pape, d’Esleu sera mocqué,
    Subit soudain, esmeu prompt & timide,
    Par trop bon doux a mourir provoqué,
    Crainte estainte la nuit de sa mort guide.

    English.

    Elected for a Pope, from Elected shall be baffled,
    Upon a sudden, moved quick and fearful,
    By too much sweetness provooked to die,
    His fear being out in the night shall be Leader to his death.

ANNOT.

This Prophecy was fulfilled in the person of the Cardinal Santa
Severina, who in the Conclave of Cardinals after the death of Pope
Innocent IX. was Elected Pope, and presently after was baffled by the
same Cardinals, and Clement the VIII. chosen in his place, for which
the other a little while after died for grief.


XIII.

    French.

    Soubs la pasture d’animaux ruminans,
    Par eux conduits au ventre Herbi-polique,
    Soldats cachez, les armes bruit menants,
    Non loin tentez de Cité Antipolique.

    English.

    Under the pasture of Beasts chewing the cud,
    Conducted by them to the Herbi-polique belly,
    Souldiers hidden, the Weapons making a noise,
    Shall be attempted not far from Antipolick City.

ANNOT.

The sense of this is, that some Souldiers disguised like Herds-men, shall
lead Oxen into a place where were hidden before Weapons in the Grass, but
the Weapons making a noise by their clashing they shall be discovered,
not far from a place that he calleth here Antipolique, purposely
to rime with Herbipolique in French, which word Herbipolique
signifieth a Town of Pasture.


XIV.

    French.

    Urnel, Vaucile, sans conseil de soy mesmes,
    Hardy, timide par crainte prins vaincu,
    Accompagné de plusieurs putains, blesme,
    A Barcelonne aux Chartreux convaincu.

    English.

    Urnel, Vaucile, without advice of his own,
    Stout and fearful, by fear taken and overcome,
    Pale, and in company of many Whores,
    Shall be convicted at Barcelone by the Charterhouse.

ANNOT.

This Stanza is an Horoscope, which the Author made upon that Gentleman
named Urnel Vaucille, and signifieth that the said man should find
himself in such perplexity that he could not be able to take advice what
to do, and that fear should make him hide himself, to be apprehended, in
a place where he should be taken.

When he was taken, he was presently convicted of those crimes that he
was accused of: therefore the Officers of Justice did conduct him to the
Charter-house of Barcelone, which is four miles from the said Town, in
a place called Campo alegre, for the beauty and situation of it, to
that place many Whores did accompany him to receive the punishment they
had deserved, therefore the Author saith that he went thither pale, as
foreseeing the terrour of the punishment he was to undergo.


XV.

    French.

    Pere Duc vieux d’ans & de soif chargé,
    Au jour extreme fils desniant l’esguiere,
    Dedans le puis vif, mort viendra plongé,
    Senat au fils la mort longue & legere.

    English.

    A Father Duke, aged and very thirsty,
    In his extremity, his son denying him the Ewer,
    Alive into a Well, where he shall be drowned,
    For which the Senate shall give the son a long and easie death.

ANNOT.

It is a Duke very aged who shall die of a Dropsie, or of some other
burning disease, which will make him very thirsty, the Physitians shall
forbid any water to be given him, therefore this Duke shall press his son
very much to give him the Ewer, that he may drink his fill, but his son
refusing, the Father shall fall into such a rage, that being alone he
will go and throw himself into a Well, where he shall be drowned.

This unhappy death will be the cause of much murmuring, and the Senate
or Parliament of that place will make enquiry after it, by which enquiry
the son will be found guilty, therefore for his punishment, he shall be
condemned to a long and easie death, as to live all his days in some
Monastery.


XVI.

    French.

    Heureux au Regne de France heureux de vie,
    Ignorant sang, mort, fureur, rapine,
    Par non flatteurs seras mis en envie,
    Roy desrobé, trop de foy en cuisine.

    English.

    Happy in the Kingdom of France, happy in his Life,
    Ignorant of blood, death, fury, of taking by force,
    By no flatterers shall be envied,
    King robbed, too much faith in Kitchin.

ANNOT.

This is a Prognostication of a King of France, who though happy in his
Reign and Life, and being given to no great vices, as blood, fury, or
taking by force, yet shall be much envied and robbed by his Subjects, and
chiefly by those he trusteth about his Kitchin.


XVII.

    French.

    La Reyne Ergaste voiant sa fille blesme,
    Par un regret dans l’estomach enclos,
    Cris lamentables seront lors d’Angolesme,
    Et au germain mariage forclos.

    English.

    Queen Ergaste seeing her Daughter pale,
    By a regret contained in her Breast,
    Then shall great cries come out of Angolesme,
    And the Marriage shall be denyed to the Cousin German.

ANNOT.

It is unknown what Queen he meaneth by the name of Ergaste; the rest is
easie. Angolesme is a City of Gascony or Languedoc.


XVIII.

    French.

    Le rang Lorrain fera place a Vendosme,
    Le haut mis bas, & le bas mis en haut,
    Le fils d’Hamon sera esleu dans Rome,
    Et les deux grands seront mis en defaut.

    English.

    The House of Lorrain shall give place to Vendosme
    The high pulled down, the low raised up,
    The son of Hamon shall be Elected into Rome,
    And the two great ones shall not appear.

ANNOT.

The two first Verses of this Prophecy were fulfilled in the time of
Henry the third King of France, in whose time the Duke of Guise,
and House of Lorrain were grown so powerful in France, that they
drove the King from Paris, and assumed themselves a rank and authority
over the Princes of the Blood, so that the King was forced to cause them
to be slain, after which Henry IV. who was King of Navarre and Duke
of Vendosme took his place again as first Prince of the Blood.

The two last Verses are too obscure to be interpreted, and I believe
were onely forced by our Author to make up his Rime, as he hath done in
several other places.


XIX.

    French.

    Jour que sera pour Roine saluée,
    Le jour apres le salut, la Priere,
    Le compte fait raison & valbuée,
    Par avant humble oncques ne fut si fiere.

    English.

    The day that she shall be saluted Queen,
    The next day after the Evening Prayer,
    All accompts being summoned and cast up,
    She that was humble before, never was one so proud.

ANNOT.

It is a woman (be like of a small Fortune) who coming to be a Queen by
her humility, the next day after Evening Prayer she shall appear so
proud, as the like was never seen.


XX.

    French.

    Tous les amis qu’auront tenu party,
    Pour rude en lettres mis mort & saccage,
    Biens publiez par fixe, grand neanty,
    Onc Romain peuple ne fut tant outrage.

    English.

    All the friends that shall have taken the part
    Of the Unlearned, put to death and robbed,
    Goods sold publickly by proclamation, a great man seized of them,
    Never Roman people was so much abused.

ANNOT.

The sense of this is, that a great man that took part with all those that
were unlearned shall be put to death, and their goods praised and sold
publickly, upon which goods another great man shall seize, and this is to
be done in Rome.

There is fault in the Impression of the third French Verse, for instead
of fixe it must be fisc and instead of Neanty it must be Nancy.


XXI.

    French.

    Par le despit du Roy soustenant moindre,
    Sera meurdry luy presentant les bagues,
    Le Pere & Fils voulant Noblesse poindre,
    Fait comme a Perse jadis firent les Magues.

    English.

    To spite the King, who took the part of the weaker,
    He shall be murdered, presenting to him Jewels,
    The Father and the Son going to vex the Nobility,
    It shall be done to them as the Magi did in Persia.

ANNOT.

This is a King who with his son taking the peoples part against the
Nobility shall be killed, in presenting to him Jewels, and he and his son
shall be dealt with all as the Magi, that is the Grandees of Persia
used to do with their Kings, whom they were wont to murder, or depose.


XXII.

    French.

    Pour ne vouloir consentir au divorce,
    Qui puis apres sera cogneu indigne,
    Le Roy des Isles sera chassé par force,
    Mis a son lien qui de Roy n’aura signe.

    English.

    For not consenting to the divorce,
    Which afterwards shall be acknowledged unworthy,
    The King of the Island shall be expelled by force,
    And another subrogated, who shall have no mark of a King.

ANNOT.

This is plain concerning England and the late calamities thereof,
when our gracious King for not consenting to the wicked factions of the
Parliament then, and that have been acknowledged so since, was expelled
by force, and an Usurpator that had not the least sign of a King sat in
his place.


XXIII.

    French.

    Au peuple ingrat faites les remonstrances,
    Par lors l’Armée se saisira d’Antibe,
    Dans larc Monech feront les doleances,
    Et a Freius l’un l’autre prendra ribe.

    English.

    The remonstrances being made to the ungrateful people,
    At that time the Army shall seize upon Antibe,
    In the River of Monaco they shall make their complaints,
    And at Freius both of them shall take their share.

ANNOT.

This signifieth that at the same time that the remonstrances shall be
made to an ungrateful people; the Army shall seize upon the Town of
Antibe, which is a Sea Town between France and Italy, and that
there shall be great complaints at Monaco, which is another Sea Town
near it, and at the place called Freius, both parties shall either
agree, or divide their shares.


XXIV.

    French.

    Le captif Prince aux Itales vaincu,
    Passera Gennes par Mer jusque a Marseille,
    Par grand effort des forens survaincu,
    Sauf coup de feu, barril liqueur d’Abeille.

    English.

    The captive Prince vanquished in Italy,
    Shall pass by Sea through Genoa to Marseilles,
    By great endeavours of forrain forces overcome,
    But that a Barrel of Honey shall save him from the fire.

ANNOT.

A Prince vanquished in Italy, and taken Prisoner shall come through
Genoa to Marseilles, where he shall be once more overcome by
strangers, but that a Barrel of Honey shall save him from being burnt.
This is the sense of the words as near as I can judge, the judicious
Reader may make what construction he pleaseth upon them.


XXV.

    French.

    Par Nebro ouvrir de Brisanne passage,
    Bien esloignez el tago fara muestra,
    Dans Pelligouxe sera commis l’outrage,
    De la grand Dame assise sur l’Orchestra.

    English.

    By Nebro to open the passage of Brisanne,
    A great way off, el tago fara muestra,
    In Pelligouxe the wrong shall be done
    Of the great Lady sitting in the Orchestra.

ANNOT.

Here once more I lost my Spectacles, and could not see through, therefore
I had rather be silent then coin lies, I shall only tell you, that
orchestra in Latine is the seat wherein noble Personages sit at the
beholding of Stage-plays.


XXVI.

    French.

    Le successeur vengera son Beau frere,
    Occuper Regne soubs ombre de vengeance,
    Occis obstacle son sang mort vitupere,
    Long temps Bretagne tiendra avec la France.

    English.

    The Successour shall avenge his Brother in Law,
    Shall hold by force the Kingdom, upon pretence of revenge,
    That hinderance shall be killed, his dead blood ashamed,
    A long time shall Brittany hold with France.

ANNOT.

This is plain enough of it self, without any interpretation.


XXVII.

    French.

    Charle cinquiesme & un grand Hercules,
    Viendront le Temple ouvrir de main bellique,
    Une Colonne, Jules & Ascan reculez,
    L’E’pagne, clef, Aigle neurent onc si grand pique.

    English.

    Charles the Fifth, and one great Hercules,
    Shall open the Temple with a Warlike hand,
    One Colonne, Julius and Ascan put back,
    Spain, the Key, Eagle were never at such variance.

ANNOT.

Charles the V. was the Emperour, and that great Hercules was Henry
the II. King of France, whom he calleth Hercules, because he was
King of France, and the Author nameth often in his Stanzas the Kings
of France Hercules or Ogmions, because that great Captain of the
Antiquity left his name glorious in the Gaules, whence the ancient
Historians have given him the name of Hercules Gallicus. Henry the
II. also was not only an Hercules by being King of France, but also a
great Hercules, because of his Warlike humour, and for his great feats
in Arms.

To open the Temple, signifieth to make War, because the Romans in
ancient time were wont to shut the Temple of Janus in time of Peace,
and kept it open during the War. Cæsar Augustus did shut that Temple
once in his time, which was never done before but twice, the first under
Numa Pompilius, the second after the overcoming of Charthage.


XXVIII.

    French.

    Second & tiers qui font prime Musique,
    Sera par Roy en honneur sublimée,
    Par grasse & maigre presque a deny etique;
    Rapport de Venus faux rendra deprimée.

    English.

    Second and third that make prime Musick,
    Shall by the King be exalted to honour,
    By a fat one, and a lean one, one in consumption,
    A false report of Venus shall pull her down.

ANNOT.

Notwithstanding the obscurity of this sense, and the bad connexion of the
words, we may perceive that by this Stanza is meant, that a King having
two Mistresses shall exalt them in great honour, till by a report made
by a fat woman and a lean one, that is in a consumption, that the said
Ladies prove unfaithful to the King, he will depress them as low as they
were before.


XXIX.

    French.

    De Pol Mansol dans Caverne caprine,
    Caché & pris extrait hors par la barbe,
    Captif mené comme beste mastine,
    Par Begourdans amenée pres de Tarbe.

    English.

    From Pol Mansol in a Goats Den,
    Hidden and taken, drawn out by the beard
    Prisoner, led as a Mastiff,
    By Begourdans shall be brought near to Tarbe.

ANNOT.

Here and in some other places of this work is to be observed, that
the Author doth sometimes put two Towns instead of one, that he may
distinguish it from others of the same name, as here he calleth Pol
Mansol to distinguish the Town of St. Paul, which is three Leagues
from the Rhosne, over against the Town of Pont St. Esprit, from that
which is in the lower parts of Provence.

The sense therefore of this Stanza is, that this Begourdans (a proper
name of a man) shall pull out another by the beard, that was hidden in a
Goats Den, and shall lead him captive as far as Tarbe, which is another
Town of Provence.


XXX.

    French.

    Nepveu & sang du St. nouveau venu,
    Par le surnom soustient arcs & couvert,
    Seront chassez mis a mort chassez nu,
    En rouge & noir convertiront leur vert.

    English.

    Nephew and blood of the Saint newly come,
    By the surname upholdeth Vaults and Covering,
    They shall be driven, put to death, and driven out naked.
    They shall change their red and black into green.

ANNOT.

Here I confess to be at a loss, as may be a wiser man then I.


XXXI.

    French.

    Le Sainct Empire viendra en Germanie,
    Ismaelites trouveront lieux ouverts,
    Asnes viendront aussy de la Caramanie,
    Les soustenans de Terre tous couverts.

    English.

    The Holy Empire shall come into Germany,
    The Ismaelites shall find open places,
    Asses shall also come out of Caramania,
    Taking their part, and covering the Earth.

ANNOT.

By the Ismaelites he meaneth the Turks, who brag to be descended from
Ismael.

Caramania is a Province of Turky, so that the sense of this Stanza
is, that there shall be a great Invasion of the Turks into Germany,
and that those of Caramania with their Asses shall come to their help,
and shall be in such numbers, as that the Earth shall be covered with
them.


XXXII.

    French.

    Le grand Empire chascun en devoit estre,
    Un sur les autres le viendra obtenir,
    Mais peu de temps sera son Regne & estre,
    Deux ans aux Naves se pourra soustenir.

    English.

    The great Empire, every one would be of it,
    One above the rest shall obtain it,
    But his time and his Reign shall last little,
    He may maintain himself two years in his Shipping.

ANNOT.

This is plain enough without interpretation.


XXXIII.

    French.

    La faction cruelle a Robe longue,
    Viendra cacher soubs les pointus Poignards,
    Saisir Florence, le Duc & le Diphlongue,
    Sa discouverte par Immeurs & Flagnards.

    English.

    The cruel faction of long Robe,
    Shall come and hide under the sharp Daggers,
    Seize upon Florence, the Duke and the Diphlongue,
    The discovery of it shall be by Countrey fellows.

ANNOT.

This is the Prognostication of a conspiracy against the Duke and City
of Florence, by those of the long Gown, which shall be discovered by
Countrey fellows, that live in places without Walls.


XXXIV.

    French.

    Gaulois qu’Empire par Guerre occupera,
    Par son Beau-frere mineur sera trahi,
    Par Cheval rude voltigeant trainera,
    Du fait le frere long temps sera hay.

    English.

    A Frenchman who shall occupy an Empire by War,
    Shall be betrayed by his Brother in Law a Pupil,
    He shall be drawn by a rude prancing Horse,
    For which fact his brother shall be long hated.

ANNOT.

This foretelleth of a Frenchman, who shall by War obtain an Empire
or Kingdom, and shall be betrayed by his Brother in Law a Pupil, whom
afterwards he shall treacherously cause to mount a fierce prancing Horse,
who shall throw him down and drag him, for which the said King shall be
hated long after.


XXXV.

    French.

    Puisné Roial flagrant d’ardant libide,
    Pour se jouir de cousine Germaine,
    Habit de femme au Temple d’Artemide,
    Allant murdry par incogneu du Marne.

    English.

    The Kingly youngest son heated with burning lust,
    For to enjoy his Cosen German,
    Shall in womans apparrel go to the Temple of Artemis;
    Going, shall be murdered by unknown du Marne.

ANNOT.

This is concerning the younger son of a King, who being extreamly in
love with his Cosen German, shall disguise himself in a womans apparel,
and shall go so disguised to the Temple of Artemide (that is of some
Church Dedicated to the Virgin Mary) to meet her, but in going, shall
be murdered by an unknown man named du Marne.


XXXVI.

    French.

    Apres le Roy du Sud guerres parlant,
    L’Isle Harmotique le tiendra a mespris,
    Quelques ans bons rongeant un & pillant,
    Par tyrannie a l’Isle changeant pris.

    English.

    After that the King of the South shall have talked of Wars,
    The Harmotick Island shall despise him,
    Some good years gnawing one and plundering,
    And by tyranny shall change the price of the Island.

ANNOT.

The two first Verses are concerning Philip the II. King of Spain,
who is called here the King of the South, whom after his vain and
frustrated Invasion of 88. the Harmotique Island (that is England)
shall deride, and he after that shall have some good years, that is
of Peace, still pillaging and plundering his Subjects, and shall
change the price of England, that is, make it of a higher value, and
more flourishing then ever it was before, as it did prove in Queen
Elizabeth’s time.


XXXVII.

    French.

    Grande assemblée pres du Lac du Borget,
    Se rallieront pres de Montmelian,
    Passants plus outre pensifs feront projet,
    Chambray, Morienne, combat Saint Julian.

    English.

    A great assembly of people near the Lake of Borget,
    Will go and gather themselves about Montmelian,
    Going beyond, they shall make an enterprize,
    Upon Chambery, Moriene, and shall fight at St. Julian.

ANNOT.

This Lake of Borget is in Savoy, as also Montmelian, Chambery,
Moriene, and St. Julian; the meaning of it then is, that a great Army
shall be gathered about that Lake, which shall go through Chambery,
Moriene, and Montmelian, and shall fight at St. Julian.


XXXVIII.

    French.

    Amour alegre non loin pose le Siege,
    Au Saint Barbar seront les Garnisons,
    Ursins, Hadrie pour Gaulois feront plaige.
    Pour peur rendus de l’Armée, aux Grisons.

    English.

    Cheerful love doth lay Siege not far,
    The Garrisons shall be at Saint Barbar,
    Ursini, Hadria shall be sureties for the French,
    And many for fear shall go from the Army to the Grisons.

ANNOT.

The first two Verses are inexplicable; the two last signifie that there
shall be an Army of Frens, with whom Hadria (that is Venice) and
the Ursini the noblest Family in Italy shall take part, insomuch,
that many of the contrary party shall run for fear to the Grisons,
which is a Nation dwelling in the Valteline and other Countreis there
about, between the Venetians and the Switzers.


XXXIX.

    French.

    Premier fils veusve malheureux mariage,
    Sans nuls enfans deux Isles en discord,
    Avant dixhuit incompetant Aage,
    De l’autre pres plus bas sera l’accord.

    English.

    Of the first son a widow, an unhappy match,
    Without any Children, two Islands at variance,
    Before eighteen an incompetant Age,
    Of the other lower shall be the agreement.

ANNOT.

Although the words be intricate, nevertheless the sense is plain,
concerning Francis the II. King of France, who being married
young, and before he was 18. years of Age, to Mary Stuart Queen
of Scotland, died presently after, and left her a widow, and also
England and Scotland (which he calleth here two Islands) at variance
among themselves; of the last Verse the sense is very obscure, and hath
relation to what did happen afterwards to the said Mary Queen of
Scots and Dowager of France.


XL.

    French.

    Le jeune nay au Regne Britannique,
    Qu’aura le Pere mourant recommandé,
    Iceluy mort Londre donra topique,
    Et a son fils le Regne demandé.

    English.

    The young man born to the Kingdom of Britanny,
    Whom his Father dying shall have recommended,
    After his death London shall give him a topick,
    And shall ask the Kingdom from his son.

ANNOT.

This Prophecy is plain, concerning his Majesty King Charles II.
now Reigning, who having been recommended by his dying Father to his
Subjects, presently after his death they turned tail, and took the
Kingdom from him for a good while.


XLI.

    French.

    En la frontiere de Caussade & Charlus,
    Non gueres loing du fond de la valée,
    De Ville Franche Musique a son de Luths,
    Environnez Combouls & grand myrtée.

    English.

    Upon the Frontiere of Caussade and Charlus,
    Not far from the bottom of the Valley,
    Of Ville Franche there shall be Musick of Lutes,
    Great dancing and great company of people met together.

ANNOT.

Caussade, Charlus, and Villefranche are little Towns in Provence,
not far one from another; the rest is easie.


XLII.

    French.

    Le Regne humain d’Angelique geniture,
    Fera son Regne, paix, union tenir,
    Captive guerre demy de sa closture,
    Long temps la paix leur fera maintenir.

    English.

    The humane Reign of an Angelical brood,
    Shall cause his Reign to be in peace and union,
    Shall make War, captive shutting it half up,
    He shall cause them to keep peace a great while.

ANNOT.

This is only a foretelling of some Gallant Prince, who shall maintain his
Subjects in great peace and tranquility.


XLIII.

    French.

    Le trop bon temps, trop de bonté Roiale,
    Faits & desfaits prompt, subit, negligence,
    Leger croira faux, despouse loiale,
    Luy mis a mort par sa benevolence.

    English.

    The time too good, too much of Royal bounty,
    Made and unmade, nimble, quick, negligence,
    Fickle shall believe false o’ his loyal Spouse,
    He shall be put to death for his good will.

ANNOT.

This is concerning another King, who through his too much goodness,
simplicity and negligence, shall make and unmake those about him, and
being fickle, shall believe false reports, made concerning his own wife;
and at last by his to much goodness, shall be put to death.


XLIV.

    French.

    Par lors qu’un Roy sera contre les siens;
    Natif de Blois subjuguera Ligueres,
    Mammel, Cordube, & les Dalmatiens,
    Des sept puis l’ombre a Roy estrennes & Lemures.

    English.

    At that time that a King shall be against his own,
    One born at Blois shall subdue the Ligures,
    Mammel, Cordua and the Dalmatians,
    After that the shadow of the seven shall be to the King a new-years
      gift and Hoggoblins.

ANNOT.

Blois is a City in France; Ligures are the Genoeses, in Latine
called Ligures; as for Mammel I cannot tell what to make of it;
Cordua is a City of Spain, and the Dalmatians is a Nation near the
Adriatick Sea, and under the Venetians; I leave the interpretation of
the last Verse to the ingenious Reader.


XLV.

    French.

    Lombre du Regne de Navarre non vray,
    Fera la vie de sort illegitime,
    La vers promis incertain de Cambray,
    Roy d’Orleans donra mur legitime

    English.

    The shadow of the Reign of Navarre not true,
    Shall make the life of illegitimate chance,
    The uncertain allowance from Cambray,
    King of Orleans shall give a lawfull Wall.

ANNOT.

The Reign or Kingdom of Navarre is called not true, because the
King of Spain doth possess it, and not the King of France, who is
the lawful King thereof, as also in regard of the Kings of France, and
before of Jane of Albret, and Antony of Bourbon.

This Kingdom being not true in regard of the said ones, the title and
quality is called here shadow. The Author saith that the quality of the
King of Navarre shall make the life of illigitimate chance, because
after the death of Francis the II Catherine of Medicis being not
opposed in the Regence by Antony of Bourbon King of Navarre, she
was willing to gratifie him in what she could.

And because his Brother Lewis Prince of Condé had been condemned to
death, and not executed, it was a fair occasion for her to shew the King
of Navarre how much she did defer to him. Therefore twelve days after
the death of King Francis, he was freed out of Prison, and was admitted
to justifie himself under the King of Navarre’s Bail.

Thus the shadow of the Kingdom of ~Navarre~ not true, did cause the
life of a Prince to be saved, but that life was illegitimate, and that
Kingdom not true by chance, that is, by accident, because of the death
of King Francis.

Leaving off the third Verse to be explained after the fourth; King
(saith the Author) shall give Orleans for legitimate, because
Charles the IX. who during the life of Francis the II. did bear the
title of Duke of Orleans, did succeed his Brother; thus the Verse saith
that Orleans shall give a King for legitimate.

Now for the third Verse, you must suppose that by the Treaty at Madrid
1526. and after this by that of Cambray, the King Francis the I. did
part with the Sovereignty of Flanders, and of all the Low Countreis
in favour of Charles the V. Emperour, it is of that uncertain
allowance of Cambray, of which the Author talketh here, and saith, that
in that time viz. of the death of Francis the II. that allowance
shall be uncertain, because Francis the I. having no power of himself
to renounce the rights and dependance of the Crown of France, the
Parliament that was assembled then, would have made void that allowance
without breaking the Peace, declaring that the Kings of France ought
to preserve the right they had upon the Low-Countreis, and to require
them again upon any occasion, and upon that France did not refuse the
Election which the Low-Countreis made of the Duke of Alencon for
their Sovereign Prince and Duke of Brabant.


XLVI.

    French.

    Vif sort mort de l’or vilain indigne,
    Sera de Saxe non nouveau Electeur,
    De Brunswick mandra d’amour signe,
    Faux le rendant au peuple seducteur.

    English.

    The living receives his death from Gold, infamous slut!
    Shall be of Saxony not the new Elector,
    From Brunswick shall come a sign of love,
    Falsly persuading the people that he is a seductor.

ANNOT.

This Prophecy is concerning an old Elector of Saxony, who being in
health before, shall die suddenly, being poisoned in a golden Cup by a
woman, whom he calleth here infamous slut.

And that from Brunswick (a Countrey adjacent to Saxony) shall come a
Messenger, upon pretence of Love, who shall persuade the people that the
said Elector was a Seducer.


XLVII.

    French.

    De Bourze Ville a la Dame Guyrlande,
    L’on mettra sus par la trahison faite,
    Le grand Prelat de Leon par Formande,
    Faux Pellerins & Rauisseurs deffaite.

    English.

    From Bourze City belonging to the Lady Garlant,
    They shall impose by a set treason,
    The great Prelate of Leon by Formande,
    False Pilgrims and Ravishers destroyed.

ANNOT.

I believe that there is a fault here in the impression, and that instead
of Bourze it must be Bourges, which is a famous City in France,
and Capitol of the Province of Berry, for I do not know any Town in
Europe called Bourze. What he meaneth by the Lady Garlant is
unknown. I believe also that instead of Leon it should be Lyon, which
is another famous City, and the first Archbishoprick of the said Kingdom.
Formande is a barbarous word, and I believe put in only to make up
the Rime, as he hath done in several other places, as much then as can
be gathered out of the sense is this, that from that City Bourges,
which usually is a Dowry for a Queen of France, which is called here
Garlant, shall a treason be hatched against the Archbishop of Lion,
which I suppose came to pass in the time of Henry the III. when Peter
of Pinac Archbishop of the said Lion, being accused by the Deputies
of Bourges for siding with the League, escaped narrowly to be killed,
when the Duke of Guise and the Cardinal his brother were. Queen
Catherine of Medicis the Kings Mother having then the said Province
and Town of Bourges for her jointure.

The last Verse hath no relation to the three foremost, and hath its
interpretation by it self, which is plain enough.


XLVIII.

    French.

    Du plus profond de l’Espagne ancienne,
    Sortants du bout & des fins de l’Europe,
    Trouble passant aupres du Pont de Laigne,
    Sera deffaits par bande sa grand troppe.

    English.

    From the utmost part of old Spain,
    Going out of the extremities of Europe,
    He that troubled the travellers by the Bridge of Laigne,
    Shall have his great Troop defeated by another.

ANNOT.

Every Traveller knoweth that Castille (which is taken here for Spain)
is divided into two parts viz. Castilia la Vecchia, and Castilia la
Nuova, our Author then saith that out of Castilia la Vecchia, which
is situated at the further end of Europe on that side, shall come a
band of men, who shall destroy the Thieves that robbed and vexed the
Travellers by the Bridge of Laigne, which it seemeth was an infamous
place for robbing.


XLIX.

    French.

    Jardin du Monde aupres de Cité neufve,
    Dans le chemin des Montagnes cavées,
    Sera saisi & plongé dans la Cuve,
    Beuvant par force eaux Soulphre envenimées.

    English.

    Garden of the World, near the new City,
    In the way of the digged Mountains,
    Shall be seized on, and thrown into the Tub,
    Being forced to drink Sulphurous poisoned waters.

ANNOT.

This word Garden of the World, doth signifie a particular person,
seeing that this Garden of the World was seized on and poisoned in a
Tub of Sulphurous water, in which he was thrown.

The History may be this, that Nostradamus passing for a Prophet and a
great Astrologer in his time, abundance of people came to him to know
their Fortunes, and chiefly the Fathers to know that of their Children,
as did Mr. Lafnier, and Mr. Cotton, Father of that renowned Jesuit of
the same name, very like then that Mr. du Jardin having a son did ask
Nostradamus what should become of him, and because his son was named
Cosmus, which in Greek signifieth the World, he answered him with these
four Verses.

Garden of the World, for Cosmus of the Garden, In his travels shall
be taken hard by the New City, in a way that hath been digged between the
Mountains, and there shall be thrown in to a Tub of poisoned Sulphurous
water to cause him to die, being forced to drink that water which those
rogues had prepared for him.

Those that have learned the truth of this History, may observe it here.
This ought to have come to pass in the last Age, seeing that the party
mentioned was then born when this Stanza was written, and this unhappy
man being dead of a violent death, there is great likelyhood, that he was
not above forty years old.

There is another difficulty, to know which is that new City, there being
many of that name in Europe, nevertheless the more probable is, that
there being many Knights of Maltha born in Provence (the native
Countrey of our Author) it may be believed that by the new City he
meaneth the new City of Maltha called la Valete, hard by which there
is paths and ways digged in the Mountains, which Mountains are as if it
were a Fence and a Barricado against the Sea, or else this Cosmus might
have been taken by Pyrats of Algiers, and there in the new City of the
Goulette be put to death in the manner aforesaid.


L.

    French.

    La Meuse au jour Terre de Luxembourg,
    Descouvrira Saturne & trois en Lurne,
    Montaigne & plaine, Ville, Cité & Bourg,
    Lorrain Deluge, trahison par grand hurne.

    English.

    The Maes by day in the Land of Luxembourg,
    Shall discover Saturn, and three in the Lurne,
    Mountain and plain, Town, City, and Countrey Town,
    A Lorrain flood, treason by a great hurne.

ANNOT.

The Maes is a River that runneth through a part of Lorrain and
Luxembourg; as for the words Lurne and hurne I do not understand
them, neither do I think they are to be found in all the French
Language, both obsolete and modern; all what I can gather out of this,
is, that a great overflowing of the River Maes, shall be both in
Luxembourg and Lorrain, insomuch that three Leaden Mines (which is
meant here by Saturn) shall be discovered, and after that, a great
Treason shall happen in the said Lorrain.


LI.

    French.

    Des lieux plus bas du Pais de Lorraine,
    Seront des basses Allemagnes unis,
    Par ceux du Siege Picards, Normans, du Maine,
    Et aux Cantons se seront reunis.

Transcriber’s Note: An English version was omitted from this printing,
but the annotation below is an accurate enough (if not very poetic)
translation.

ANNOT.

The sense of this is, that the lower Lorrain and Germany being united
together, shall have War with the other three Nations, of Picards,
Normans, and Manceaux, which having Besieged a Town, shall constrain
the Lorrainers and Low-germans, to unite themselves with the Cantons
of Switzerland.


LII.

    French.

    Au lieu ou Laye & Scelde se marient,
    Seront les Nopces de long temps mamée,
    Au lieu d’Anvers ou la grappe charient,
    Jeune vieillesse conforte intammée.

    English.

    In the place where Laye and Scelde are united,
    Shall the Nuptials be, that were long a doing.
    In the place of Antwerp where they draw the grape,
    The young unspotted will comfort the old Age.

ANNOT.

There is fault in the Impression, for instead of Laye it must be Lis,
which is a River that runneth through Flanders, and dischargeth it self
into the Scelde, which is the River that passeth at Antwerp, the
sense therefore of this Prophecy is, that in the place where the River of
Lis joyneth with the Scelde, there shall the Nuptials be consummated
that were long a doing, and the place of Antwerp, where they unload the
Wines, there shall a young unspotted Lady Marry, and comfort an old man.


LIII.

    French.

    Les trois Pellices de loing s’entrebattront,
    La plus grand moindre demeurera a l’ecoute,
    Le grand Selin n’en sera plus patron,
    Le nommera feu, pelte, blanche, route.

    English.

    The three Concubines shall fight one with another a far off,
    The greatest less shall remain watching,
    The great Selin shall be no more their Patron,
    And shall call it fire, pelte, white, route.

ANNOT.

This Prophecy is concerning the Turkish Empire, where three of the
great Turks Concubines, which in Latine are called Pellices, shall
make War one against another, the great Turk himself favouring neither
party.


LIV.

    French.

    Née en ce Monde par Concubine furtive,
    A deux hault mise par les tristes nouvelles,
    Entre Ennemis sera prinse Captive,
    Et amenée a Malines & Bruxelles.

    English.

    Born in this world from a stolen Concubine,
    Set up at two heights by the sad news,
    Shall be taken Prisoner among the Enemies,
    And brought to Malines and Bruxelles.

ANNOT.

This is concerning some Lady of quality, born of a Concubine, who
shall be set up by reason of some sad news that shall be brought,
and afterwards shall be taken Prisoner, and carryed to Malines and
Bruxelles, two Cities of the Low-Countreys.


LV.

    French.

    Les malheureuses Nopces celebreront,
    En grande joye mais la fin malheureuse,
    Mary & Mere Nore desdaigneront,
    Le Phibe mort, & Nore plus piteuse.

    English.

    The unhappy Nuptials shall be celebrated,
    With great joy, but the end shall be unhappy,
    Husband and Mother shall scorn Nore,
    The Phybe dead, and Nore more pitifull.

ANNOT.

If by Phybe we understand the Admiral of Chastillon, and by Nore,
Queen Margaret of Valois, the rest will be easie. For in the year
1572. a Match was made between Henry the IV. then King of Navarre,
chief of the Protestant party, and Margaret of Valois, Sister to
Charles the IX. to this Wedding were the chief of the Protestant party
invited, who were there Massacred, and among the rest Gaspard of
Coligny, Lord of Chastillon, and Admiral of France, whom he calleth
here Phybe. And when he saith, that Husband and Mother shall scorn
~Nore~, he sheweth the slight Opinion and regard that the Queen Mother
had for her Daughter, and Henry the IV. for his Wife, whom he after
repudiated.


LVI.

    French.

    Prelat Roial soy baissant trop tiré,
    Grand Flux de Sang sortira par sa bouche,
    Le Regne Anglicque par Regne respiré,
    Long temps mort vif en Tunis comme souche.

    English.

    Royal Prelate bowing himself too much,
    A great flood of Blood shall come out of his mouth,
    The English Reign by Reign respited,
    A great while dead, alive in Tunis like a Log.

ANNOT.

A Prelate, is a man of eminent dignity in the Church, the Royal prelate
must be a Churchman of the Royal Blood, who bowing himself too much,
shall fall into an Hæmorhagie or Flux of Blood at his Mouth. The third
Verse signifieth, that the Kingdom of England shall be relieved from
some distress by another Kingdom or Prince that had been a Slave a great
while at Tunis, and lyen there, dead alive like a Log of Wood.


LVII.

    French.

    Le sublevé ne cognoistra son Sceptre,
    Les enfans jeunes des plus grands honnira,
    Oncques ne fut un plus ord cruel estre,
    Pour leur Espouses a mort noir bannera.

    English.

    The exalted shall not know his Scepter
    He shall put to shame the young Children of the greatest,
    Never was one more dirty and cruel,
    He shall banish to Black death their Spouses.

ANNOT.

This is concerning a great Tyrant, who being exalted to the dignity of a
King, shall not know how to govern; but shall slight and put to shame the
Children of the greatest Nobility, and shall banish their Wives out of
the Land; this hath a relation to the late Tyrant Cromwell.


LVIII.

    French.

    Au temps du dueil que le Selin Monarque,
    Guerroiera le jeune Æmathien,
    Gaule bransler, pericliter la barque,
    Tenter Phocens au ponant entretien.

    English.

    In the time of mourning, when the Monarch Selin,
    Shall make War against the young Æmathien,
    France shall quake, the Ship shall be in danger,
    Phocens shall be attempted, the business shall be in the West.

ANNOT.

You must observe here, that by Æmathien the Author meaneth the King of
France, as he doth in many other places; and by Selin, he meaneth the
great Turk, because such was the name of him that lived in his time,
this being presupposed the meaning of this is, that the great Turk
shall fight against the King of France, and shall attempt Phocens,
which is Marseilles, as being a Colony of the old Phocenses in
Græcia, which shall cause all France to quake, and the Ship to be in
danger, which is Paris, who beareth a Ship for its Arms.


LIX.

    French.

    Dedans Lion vingt & cinq d’une haleine,
    Cinq Citoyens Germains, Bressans, Latines,
    Par dessous Noble conduiront longue traine,
    Et descouvers par abboy de Mastins.

    English.

    In Lyons five and twenty of a breadth
    Five Citizens Germans, Bressans, Latines,
    Under Noblemen shall conduct a long Train,
    And shall be discovered by the barking of Mastiffs.

ANNOT.

The Marshal of St. André, Governour of Lyon being absent, the
Protestants undertook the taking of it, at the solicitation of some
principal Lords at Court, among whom were named the Prince of Condé,
and the Vidame of Chartres, Francis of Vendosme, Knight of the
Order. The Abbot of Savigny, who did supply the place of the Governour,
and was named Antony of Albon, since that Archbishop of Arles,
having discovered this Conspiracy, went to surprise the undertakers, but
as he was going upon the night of the 5 of September, he met with some
of the confederates upon the Bridge of Saone, which made him retreat
with some loss.

The next day having gathered more Forces, he took three of them that were
strangers and young, the rest escaping, those three were hanged the next
Saturday, which was the 7 of that Month.

The Marshal being come to Town, there was Execution made upon some of the
Inhabitants, to the number of 4 that were hanged.

After that there were informations made concerning the Authors and
Abettors of the said conspiracy, and many other Citizens and strangers
were put to Prison, and besides them the Vidame of Chartres, who was
carryed to Paris, and put into the Bastille, and after that in
the Tournelles, where he died before his process was ended, the 23
December 1560.

It is what our Author saith in this stanza; in the first Verse he saith,
that there were five and twenty of a breadth, of whose five and twenty
there was five Citizens of the Town, and the rest were Germans,
Bressans and Italians, of these Citizens 4 were hanged, and three of the
strangers.

Those 25 undertakers, of which the Author saith, that under Noblemen
they shall conduct a long Train; that is, that under the support and
favour of many Noblemen, they would undertake a thing that should not end
so soon as it proved afterwards; for although this enterprise did fail,
yet was the beginning of horrid combustions that followed afterwards.

This enterprise it seemeth was discovered by barking of Mastiffs.

The Apology for the City of Lyon treateth at large of this, and nameth
all those conspirators, who for the most part were of Germany and
Geneva.


LX.

    French.

    Je pleure Nice, Monaco, Pise, Genes,
    Savone, Sienne, Capoue, Modene, Malthe,
    Le dessus sang & glaive par estrenes,
    Feu, trembler Terre, eau, malheureuse nolte.

    English.

    I bewail Nice, Monaco, Pisa, Genoa,
    Savona, Sienna, Capoua, Modena, Maltha,
    Upon them blood and sword for a new years-gift,
    Fire, Earth-quake, water, unhappy nolte.

ANNOT.

All these Cities are situated by the Mediterranean Sea, and most of
them upon that part of it, which is called the River of Genoa, and
are threatned here by all the plagues above mentioned; as for the
word nolte it is a barbarous one, forced here to make up the Rime in
French.


LXI.

    French.

    Betta, Vienne, Comorre, Sacarbance,
    Voudront livrer aux Barbares Pannone,
    Par picque et feu, enorme violence,
    Les conjurez d’escouverts par Matrone.

    English.

    Betta, Vienna, Comorre, Sacarbance,
    Shall endeavour to deliver Pannone to the Barbarians,
    By Pike, and fire, extraordinary violence!
    The conspirators discovered by a Matron.

ANNOT.

It seemeth that there will be a conspiracy of some men out of all the
above mentioned Cities, to surrender Hungary (which in Latine is called
Pannonia) to the great Turk, but that conspiracy shall be discovered by
a Matron, that is, a grave ancient Woman.


LXII.

    French.

    Pres de Sorbin pour assaillir Hongrie,
    L’Heraut de Bude le viendra advertir,
    Chef Bizantin, Sallon de Sclavonie,
    A Loy d’Arabes les viendra convertir.

    English.

    Near Sorbin, to invade Hungary,
    The Herald of Buda shall come to give them notice of it,
    Chief Bizantin, Sallon of Sclavonia,
    Shall come to turn them to the Arabian Religion.

ANNOT.

This seemeth to have a relation to the precedent, and that near that
place he calleth Sorbin, preparations shall be made to Invade
Hungary, but they shall have notice of it by some body of Buda.

He that is called here Chief Bizantin, is the great Turk or his
grand Vizir, who hath his abode in Constantinople, anciently called
Bizantium.


LXIII.

    French.

    Cydron, Ragusa, la Cité au Sainct Hieron,
    Reverdira le medicant secours,
    Mort fils de Roy part mort de deux Heron,
    L’Arabe, Hongrie, feront un mesme cours.

    English.

    Cydron, Raguse, the City of Saint Hieron,
    Shall make green again the Physical help,
    The Kings Son dead, by the death of two Herons,
    Arabia and Hungary shall go the same way.

ANNOT.

The meaning of this is, that when those three Cities named in the first
Verse shall have need of succours, and that a Kings Son shall die in
flying two Herons, then shall Arabia and Hungary be under the same
Master.


LXIV.

    French.

    Pleure Milan, pleure Lucques, Florence,
    Que ton grand Duc sur le Char montera,
    Changer le Siege pres de Venise s’advance,
    Lors que Colonne a Rome changera.

    English.

    Weep Milan, weep Lucques, and Florence,
    When the great Duke shall go upon the Chariot,
    To change the Siege near Venice he goeth about,
    When Colonne shall change at Rome.

ANNOT.

This Prophecy seemeth to portend the change of the See of Rome in some
place near to Venice, and this is to happen when the great Duke of
Tuscany shall ascend upon a Triumphant Chariot, and that the House of
Colonne (which is the more powerfull in Rome) shall take his part.


LXV.

    French.

    O vaste Rome ta ruine s’aproche,
    Non de tes Murs, de ton sang, & substance,
    L’aspre par lettres fera si horrible coche,
    Fer pointu mis a tous jusques au manche.

    English.

    O great Rome thy ruine draweth near,
    Not of thy Walls, of thy blood and substance,
    The sharp by Letters shall make so horrid a notch,
    Sharp Iron thrust in all to the haft.

ANNOT.

This is a confirmation of the foregoing Prophecy, by which it is said
that the destruction of Rome shall not be in her Walls, blood or
substance, but onely by Letters or Doctrine that shall put quite down
the Roman Religion.


LXVI.

    French.

    Le Chef de Londres par Regne l’Americh,
    L’Isle d’Escosse tempiera par gelée,
    Roy, Reb. auront un si faux Antechrist,
    Que les mettra tretous dans la meslée.

    English.

    The Chief of London by Reign of America,
    The Island of Scotland shall catch thee by a frost,
    King and Reb. shall have so false an Antichrist,
    As will put them altogether by the ears.

ANNOT.

I conceive this Prophecy can be appropriated to no body better then
Oli. Cromwel, who is called here the Chief of ~London~ by Reign of
~America~, that is, by Reign of confusion, whose projects and treasons
were all brought to nought, by the victorious Mars of the ever renowned
General Monck, who came with his Army from Scotland to London in
the Winter time, he is called also a false Antichrist, because he was an
enemy to King and Reb. that is Respublica or Common-wealth.


LXVII.

    French.

    Le tremblement si fort au mois de May,
    Saturne, Caper, Jupiter, Mercure au Bœuf,
    Venus aussy, Cancer, Mars en Nonnay,
    Tombera gresle lors gresse qu’un œuf.

    English.

    The Earth-quake shall be so great in the month of May,
    Saturn, Caper, Jupiter, Mercury in the Bull,
    Venus also, Cancer, Mars in Nonnay,
    Then shall fall Hail bigger then an Egge.

ANNOT.

The meaning is, that when all these Cœlestial bodies shall be so
disposed, that there will be a fearful Earth-quake and Hail.


LXVIII.

    French.

    L’Armée de Mer devant Cité tiendra,
    Puis partira sans faire longue allée,
    Citoyens grande proye en Terre prendra,
    Retourner classe reprendre grand emblée.

    English.

    The Fleet shall stand before the City,
    Then shall go away for a little while,
    And then shall take a great troop of Citizens on Land,
    Fleet shall come back and recover a great deal.

ANNOT.

It seemeth here he speaketh of two Fleets, one of which shall stand a
little while before a Town, and carry a great many Citizens away, but
that the other Fleet shall come in the mean time, and redeem them.


LXIX.

    French.

    Le fait luysant de neuf vieux eslevé,
    Seront si grands par Midy Aquilon,
    De sa sœur propre grandes alles levé,
    Fuyant meurdry au buisson d’Ambellon.

    English.

    The bright actions of new old exalted,
    Shall be so great through the South and North,
    By his own Sister great forces shall be raised,
    Running away he shall be murdered near the bush of Ambellon.

ANNOT.

The question here is, whether this neuf vieux in French or new old
in English be the proper name of a man, or be a Metaphor, to express a
young man of an ancient Family, when the Reader hath satisfied himself
upon that, the rest is easie enough.


LXX.

    French.

    L’œil par objet fera telle excroissance,
    Tant & ardente que tombera la Neige,
    Champ arrousé viendra en decroissance,
    Que le Primat succombera a Rhege.

    English.

    The eye by the object shall make such an excressency,
    Because so much, and so burning shall fall the Snow,
    The Field watered shall come to decay
    Insomuch that the Primat shall fall down at Rhege.

ANNOT.

All this is nothing but an extraordinary great Snow that shall fall about
Rhegio a City of Italy, whereby the Fields shall be drowned and fall
to decay; insomuch, that the chief men, called here Primate shall fall
to poverty.


LXXI.

    French.

    La Terre & l’Air geleront si grand eau,
    Lors qu’on viendra pour Jeudy venerer,
    Ce qui sera jamais ne fut si beau,
    Des quattre parts le viendront honorer.

    English.

    The Earth and the Air shall freeze with so much water,
    When they shall come to worship Thursday,
    That which shall be never, was so fair,
    From the four parts they shall come to honour him.

ANNOT.

This signifieth an exceeding great frost, which shall happen on a Holy
Thursday, where the ground and sky shall be so clear, that men may come
from the four parts (viz. of the Earth) without trouble for to worship.


LXXII.

    French.

    L’an mil neuf cent nonante neuf, sept mois,
    Du Ciel viendra un grand Roy d’effrayeur,
    Resusciter le grand Roy d’Angoumois,
    Avant apres, Mars Regner par bonheur.

    English.

    In the year a thousand nine hundred ninety nine, and seven months,
    From Heaven a great terrible King,
    To raise again the great King of Angoulesme,
    Before and after, Mars shall Reign luckily.

ANNOT.

He that is called here King of Angoulesme was Francis the I. as
gallant a Prince as ever France had, who before he was King went by the
title of Duke of Angoulesme; the rest is easie.


LXXIII.

    French.

    Le temps present avecque le passé,
    Sera jugé par grand Jovialiste,
    Le Monde tard de luy sera lassé,
    Et desloial par le Clergé juriste.

    English.

    The time present, together with the past,
    Shall be judged by a great Jovialiste,
    The World shall at last be weary of him,
    And he shall be thought unfaithful by the Canon-Law Clergy.

ANNOT.

This Prophecy concerneth meerly Francis Rabelais, who was the greatest
Jovialist, that is, Merry-man that ever was, and did so lash and
censure the abuses of every profession, and chiefly of the Clergy, that
to this very day he goeth among them for an Atheist, and a Prophaner of
Sacred and Civil things.


LXXIV.

    French.

    An revolu du grand nombre septiesme,
    Apparoistra au temps jeux d’Hecatombe,
    Non esloignez du grand age milliesme,
    Que les entrez sortiront de leur Tombe.

    English.

    The year of the great number seven being past,
    Shall be seen at that time the sports of Hecatombe,
    Not far from the great age thousand,
    That the Buried shall come out of their Graves.

ANNOT.

Hecatombe signifieth a Sacrifice, wherein a hundred beasts were killed.

The sense therefore is this, that when the year a thousand seven hundred
is past, that such sport of Hecatombe shall be seen again, not far
from the sixth Millenary, when the day shall rise, for it is a common
opinion among the Learned, that as God Created the World in six days, and
rested the seventh, so when the World hath lasted six thousand years, for
a thousand years before God are as one day, there shall be an Eternal
Sabbath and a Resurrection, both of the just and unjust.


LXXV.

    French.

    Tant attendu ne reviendra jamais,
    Dedans l’Europe, en Asia apparoistra,
    Un de la ligne yssu du grand Hermes,
    Et sur tous Rois de Orient croistra.

    English.

    So long expected shall never come
    Into Europe, in Asia shall appear,
    One come forth of the line of the great Hermes,
    And shall grow above all the Kings in the East.

ANNOT.

All is plain, but only this, whether he taketh Hermes as a King of
Ægypt, or as the Father of the Hermetick Philosophers.


LXXVI.

    French.

    Le grand Senat decernera la Pompe,
    A un qu’apres sera vaincu chassé,
    Des adhærans seront a son de trompe,
    Biens publiez, ennemy dechassé.

    English.

    The great Senate will decree a Pomp,
    To one who after shall be vanquished and expelled,
    The goods of his partners shall be
    Publickly sold, and the enemy shall be driven away.

ANNOT.

What Senate and particular man he meaneth, is the only difficulty in this.


LXXVII.

    French.

    Trente adhærans de l’Ordre des Quirettes,
    Bannis, leurs biens donnez ses adversaires,
    Tous leurs bienfaits seront pour demerites,
    Classe espargie, delivrez aux corsaires.

    English.

    Thirty associated of the Order of Quirettes,
    Banished, their goods shall be given to their adversaries,
    All their good deeds shall be imputed to them as crimes,
    The Fleet scattered, they shall fall into the hands of Pyrates.

ANNOT.

I could not find any man or Author that knew what is meant here by
Quirettes, which is only the difficulty of this Stanza.


LXXVIII.

    French.

    Subite joye en subite tristesse,
    Sera a Rome aux graces embrassées,
    Dueil, cris, pleurs, larm, sang, excellent liesse,
    Contraires bandes surprises & troulsées.

    English.

    Sudden joy shall turn into a sudden sadness,
    At Rome to the embraced graces,
    Mourning, cries, weeping, tears, blood, excellent joy,
    Contrary Troops surprized and carryed away.

ANNOT.

There is nothing difficult here, but what he meaneth by Embraced
graces, for my part I believe them some new married Couples, who in the
middle of their jollity shall fall into these disasters.


LXXIX.

    French.

    Les vieux chemins seront tous embellis,
    L’on passera a Memphis somentrées,
    Le grand Mercure d’Hercule fleur de lys,
    Faisant trembler Terre, Mer, & Contrées.

    English.

    The old ways shall be made all fair,
    There shall be a passage to Memphis Somentrées,
    The great Mercury of Hercules Flower de luce,
    Making the Earth, the Sea, and the Countreys to quake.

ANNOT.

This word Somentrees, being altogether barbarous, is the reason that
neither sense nor construction can be made of all these words.


LXXX.

    French.

    Au Regne grand, du grand Regne Regnant,
    Par force d’armes les grands Portes d’airain,
    Fera ouvrir le Roy & Duc joignant,
    Port demoly, nef a fonds jour serain.

    English.

    In the great Reign, of the great Reign Reigning,
    By force of Arms the great Brass Gates,
    He shall cause to be open, the King being joyned with the Duke,
    Haven demolish’d, Ship sunk on a fair day.

ANNOT.

The words and the sense are plain, though the parties be unknown.


LXXXI.

    French.

    Mis Tresor Temple, Citadins Hesperiques,
    Dans iceluy retire en secret lieu,
    Le Temple ouvrir, les liens fameliques,
    Repris, ravis proye horrible au milieu.

    English.

    A Treasure put in a Temple by Hesperian Citizens,
    In the same hid in a secret place,
    The hungry bonds shall cause the Temple to be open,
    And take again and ravish, a fearful prey in the middle.

ANNOT.

This is concerning a Treasure hid by Spaniards (called here Hesperian
Citizens) in a Church, which the people of a Town being poor, and almost
starved, caused to be open, and did ransack it, but in the middle of it
they found a strange prey, but what it was God knows.


LXXXII.

    French.

    Cris, pleurs, larmes viendront avec couteaux,
    Semblant faux donront dernier assaut,
    L’entour parques planter profons plateaux,
    Vifs repoussez & meurdris de plain saut.

    English.

    Cries, weeping, tears, shall come with daggers,
    With a false seeming they shall give the last assault,
    Set round about they shall plant deep,
    Beaten back alive, and murdered upon a sudden.

ANNOT.

This seemeth to have a relation to the Scalado of Geneva, of which you
shall have a full account in the 69 Stanza, of the twelfth Century.


LXXXIII.

    French.

    De batailler ne sera donné signe,
    Du Parc seront contraints de sortir hors,
    De Gasp l’entour sera cogneu l’enseigne,
    Qui fera mettre de tous les siens a mort.

    English.

    There shall no sign of battle be given,
    They shall be compelled to come out of the Park,
    Round about Gasp shall be known the Ensign,
    That shall cause all his own to be put to death.

ANNOT.

This Prophecie was fulfilled in the year 1556. by the Marshal of Brissac
in Piemont, when he took the Town of Vignal by assault, where 1200.
Neapolitans were put to the Sword, who were called the braves of
Naples; because they were all very gallantly habited, and the Governour
being wounded, cast himself desperately into a Well, whence the Marshal
caused him to be taken up, and to be cured of his wounds.

In this conflict there was no sign of Battle given; because it was
done by the rashness of a Souldier, Bastard of a Bastard of the house
of Boissy, who without expecting the command of the General, went
alone upon the breche, and after he had [Transcriber’s Note: the text
is illegible here with 1-2 words missing] against the Enemies, drew his
Sword, and did fight a great while hand to hand without being wounded.

Some of his Companions seeing his valour, did follow him, and others
came to their help, and these carryed along with them all those that
were appointed to give the assault; insomuch that by a kind of Warlike
emulation, all did carry themselves so valliantly, that after a long and
stout resistance, they routed the Enemies, and put all the Garrisons to
the Sword.

It is what the Author saith in the first and second Verse, seeing that
those that were appointed to give Battle, every one in his Regiment or
Squadron, were compelled by emulation to come out of their Park; that
is, from the Precinct of place wherein they were. The third Verse addeth,
that round about the Ensign of ~Gasp.~ shall be known; that is, in the
assault the Captain of that place, named Gaspar Pagan, was remarked to
fight valliantly every where the French did assault, which the Marshal
of Brissac seeing, as also the forwardness of his men commanded the
general assault to be given. The Captain seeing the Town taken, though
he had above twenty wounds, for marks of his Valour, yet by that despair
threw himself into a Well, near which the Marshal passing, heard his
voice, and caused him to be drawn out, and cured of his wounds.

This Captain being resolved to perish in this assault, did cause all his
own to be put to death, as the fourth Verse saith. The History of this
Town was famous, for which the Marshal of Brissac did present Gifts to
the most Valiant, and among the rest to this Bastard, after he had put
him in jeopardy of his life, for having violated the Military Orders in
a matter of such concernment. That Town of Vignal is situated upon a
Mountain of the Countrey of Montserrat, of a difficult access, where
no pieces of Ordinance can be brought up, but by the help of Mens Arms;
after the taking of it, the Marshal did cause it to be raised even to
the ground, because it could not be useful to the French, that had
many other places to keep, and might have been very beneficial to the
Spaniard.


LXXXIV.

    French.

    Le Naturel a si haut, haut non bas,
    Le tard retour sera marris contens.
    Le Recloing ne sera sans debats,
    En emploiant & perdant tout son temps.

    English.

    The Natural to so high, high not low,
    The late return shall make the sad contented,
    The Recloing shall not be without strife,
    In employing and loosing all his time.

ANNOT.

The Recloing, being a forged word, without signification, and being the
Key of all this Stanza, no body can tell what to make of it.


LXXXV.

    French.

    Le vieil Tribun au point de la Trehemide,
    Sera presse Captif ne delivrer,
    Le vueil non vueil, le mal parlant timide.
    Par legitime a ses amis livrer.

    English.

    The old Tribun, at the point of the Trehemide,
    Shall be much intreated not to deliver the Captain,
    They will not will, the ill speaking fearful,
    By legitimate shall deliver to his friends.

ANNOT.

The old Treban is an old Captain or Governour of a Town, who shall be
much entreated not to deliver at the end of the Trehemede (that is,
three Months) one that he kept prisoner, but will they or not, he shall
lawfully deliver him to his friends.


LXXXVI.

    French.

    Comme un Gryphon viendra le Roy d’Europe,
    Accompagne de ceux d’Aquilon,
    De rouges & blancs conduira grande Troupe,
    Et Iront contre le Roy de Babylon.

    English.

    As a Griffin shall come the King of Europe,
    Accompanied with those of the North,
    Of red and white shall conduct a great Troop,
    And they shall go against the King of Babylon.

ANNOT.

This is concerning the King of Swedeland, Gustavus Adolphus, who is
called here the King of Europe; because he lived in a part of it, and
because he was one, if not the most gallant Prince of his time, who with
a great Army of his Subjects, named here those of Aquilon, invaded
Germany, and made War against the Emperour, whom he calleth here the
King of Babylon, either because he is a great favourer of the Roman
Church, or because the Empire, by reason of so many sovereign Princes in
it is like a Babel and confusion.

The great Troop of Red and White, were his own Souldiers, whom he
distinguished by their several habits. Clothing them with several
Colours, to breed an emulation among them, there being the Red Regiment,
the White, the Blew, the Yellow, the Green, &c.


LXXXVII.

    French.

    Grand Roy viendra prendre port pres de Nice,
    Le grand Empire de la mort si en fera
    Aux Antipodes posera son genisse,
    Par Mer la Pille tout esvanouira.

    English.

    A great King shall land by Nice,
    The great Empire of death shall interpose with it.
    He shall put his Mare in the Antipodes,
    By Sea all the Pillage shall vanish.

ANNOT.

A great King shall land hard by Nice, which is a Sea Town in Savoy,
but he shall have a great loss of his men by death, and the Sea shall
swallow all his plunder.


LXXXVIII.

    French.

    Pieds & Cheval a la seconde veille,
    Feront entrée vastiant tout par Mer,
    Dedans le Port entrera de Marseille,
    Pleurs, cris & sang, onc nul temps si amer.

    English.

    Foot and Horse upon the second Watch,
    Shall come in destroying all by Sea,
    They shall come into the Harbour of Marseilles,
    Tears, cryes and blood, never was so bitter a time.

ANNOT.

This is so clear that it needeth no interpretation.


LXXXIX.

    French.

    De Bricque en Marbre seront les Murs reduits,
    Sept & cinquante années pacifiques,
    Joye aux humains renevé l’aqueduct,
    Santé, grands fruits, joye & temps mellifique.

    English.

    The Walls shall be turned from Brick into Marble,
    There shall be peace for seven and fifty years,
    Joy to mankind, the Aqueduct shall be built again,
    Health, abundance of fruit, joy and mellifluous time.

ANNOT.

After so many calamities Prognosticated by the Author, he promiseth here
seven and fifty year of a golden Age, but when? he maketh no mention.


XC.

    French.

    Cent fois mourra le Tyran inhumain,
    Mis a son lieu scavant & debonnaire,
    Tout le Senat sera dessoubs sa main;
    Fasche sera par malin temeraire.

    English.

    The inhumane tyrant shall die a hundred times,
    In his place shall be put a Learned and mild man,
    All the Senate shall be at his command,
    He shall be made angry by a rash malicious person.

ANNOT.

This Prognostication is easie to be understood, only it is indeterminate,
and specifieth neither time nor persons.


XCI.

    French.

    Clergé Romain l’an mil six cens & neuf,
    Au chef de l’an fera Election,
    D’un gris & noir de la Campagne yssu,
    Qui oncques ne fut si malin.

    English.

    The Roman Clergy in the year a thousand six hundred and nine,
    In the beginning of the year shall make choice
    Of a gray and black, come out of the Countrey,
    Such a one as never a worse was.

ANNOT.

Wanting the Chronology of the Popes, I have not set down who that Pope
was, then whom our Author saith there never was a worse, but the time
being so punctually prefixed, it will be an easie matter for the Reader
to find out satisfaction in this point.


XCII.

    French.

    Devant le Pere l’Enfant sera tué,
    Le Pere apres entre cordes de jonc,
    Genevois peuple sera esvertué,
    Gisant le Chef au milieu comme un tronc.

    English.

    The Child shall be killed before the Fathers eyes,
    The Father after shall enter into ropes of rushes,
    The people of Geneva shall notably stir themselves,
    The Chief lying in the middle like a log.

ANNOT.

This Prophecy is twofold, the two first Verses foretel of a man that
shall have his Son killed before his eyes, and himself afterward shall be
strangled by a rope made of Rushes.

The two last Verses are concerning the people of Geneva, who (as he
saith) shall lustily bestir themselves, while their Captain, Chief, or
Commander shall carelesly lie like a log.


XCIII.

    French.

    La Barque neuve recevra les Voiages,
    La & aupres transfereront l’Empire,
    Beaucaire, Arles, retiendront les Hostages,
    Pres deux Colomnes trouvées de Porphyre.

    English.

    The new Ship shall make journeys
    Into the place, and thereby where they shall translate the Empire,
    Beaucaire, Arles, shall keep the Hostages,
    Near them shall be found two Columns of Porphyry.

ANNOT.

This Prophecy is concerning three things, the first is of a considerable
new Ship, that shall sail several times into a place where the Empire
shall be translated.

The second is concerning two Towns of Languedoc, Beaucaire, and
Arles, who shall not surrender the Hostages that they had.

The third is concerning two Columns of Porphiry that shall be found
there about.


XCIV.

    French.

    De Nismes, d’Arles, & Vienne contemner,
    Nobeyront a ledict Hesperique,
    Au Labouriez pour le grand condamner,
    Six eschapez en habit Seraphique.

    English.

    From Nismes, d’Arles and Vienna contempt,
    They shall not obey the Spanish Proclamation,
    To the Labouriez for to condemn the great one,
    Six escaped in a Seraphical habit.

ANNOT.

It seemeth that those three aforenamed Towns will refuse to obey a
Spanish Proclamation, that would compel them to condemn a great man; as
for Labouriez it is a barbarous and non-sensical word.

The last Verse signifieth, that six shall escape, cloathed in
Franciscan habits, called here Seraphical, because the Franciscans
believe that a Seraphin did appear to St. Francis their Patron, from
whence their Order is called by many the Seraphical Order.


XCV.

    French.

    Dans les Espagnes viendra Roy trespuissant,
    Par Mer & Terre subjugant au Midy,
    Ce mal sera rabaissant le croissant,
    Baisser les aisles a ceux de Vendredy.

    English.

    A most potent King shall come into Spain,
    Who by Sea and Land shall make great Conquests towards the South,
    This evil shall beat down the horns of the new Moon,
    And slack the Wings of those of Friday.

ANNOT.

A great and potent King shall come out of ~Spain~, who by Sea and Land
shall make great Conquest towards the South, that is Barbary, which
shall be a great prejudice to the Turkish Empire, who hath for his Arms
a new Moon; And slack the wings of those of ~Friday~, that is, of the
Turks, because they keep the Friday for their Sabbath. This Prophecy
was fulfilled by Philip the II. King of Spain, who drove away all the
Moores out of the South part of it, and took a great many places in the
Coasts of Barbary.


XCVI.

    French.

    Religion du nom des Mers viendra,
    Contre la Secte fils Adaluncatif,
    Secte obstinée deplorée craindra,
    Des deux blessez par Aleph & Aleph.

    English.

    Religion of the name of the Seas shall come,
    Against the Sect son Adaluncatif,
    Obstinate Sect deplorate shall be afraid,
    Of the two wounded by Aleph and Aleph.

ANNOT.

I confess my ignorance in the intelligence of this Stanza.


XCVII.

    French.

    Triremes pleines tout aage captifs,
    Temps bon a mal, le doux pour amertume,
    Proye a Barbare trop tost seront hastifs,
    Cupide de voir plaindre au vent la plume.

    English.

    Triremes full of Captives of all Age.
    Time good for evil, the sweet for bitter,
    Pray to the Barbarian, they shall be too hasty,
    Desirous to see the feather complain in the wind.

ANNOT.

Triremes are Galleys with three benches of Oares, the rest is much of the
nature of the former.


XCVIII.

    French.

    La splendeur clairëa Pucelle joieuse,
    Ne luira plus, long temps sera sans Sel,
    Avec Marchans, Ruffiens, Loups, odieuse,
    Tous pesle mesle monstre universel.

    English.

    The clear splendour of the merry Maid,
    Shall shine no more, she shall be a great while without Salt,
    With Merchants, Ruffans, Wolves, odious,
    All promiscuously, she shall be an universal Monster.

ANNOT.

This is concerning a famous beauty, who in her latter age shall
prostitute her self to all comers.


XCIX.

    French.

    A la fin le Loup, le Lion, Bœuf & l’Asne,
    Timide dama seront avec Mastins,
    Plus ne cherra a eux la douce Manne,
    Plus vigilance & custode aux Mastins.

    English.

    At last the Wolf, the Lion, Oxe and Asse,
    Fearful Doe, shall be with the Mastiffs,
    The sweet Manna shall no more fall to them,
    There shall be no more watching and keeping of Mastiffs.

ANNOT.

This is a Prognostication of a general peace all Europe over.

The sweet Manna shall no more fall to them, signifieth that the
Europeans shall be fed no more with Manna, as the Jews were in the
Desert, but shall pass to the Land of Promise, that is of peace and
quietness.


C.

    French.

    Le grand Empire sera par l’Angleterre,
    Le Pempotan des ans plus de trois cens,
    Grandes Copies passer par Mer & Terre,
    Les Lusitains n’en seront pas contens.

    English.

    The great Empire shall be in England,
    The Pempotan for more then three hundred years,
    Great Armies shall pass through Sea and Land,
    The Portugueses shall not be contented therewith.

ANNOT.

This is a favourable one for England, for by it the Empire, or the
greatest Dominion of Europe is promised to it, for the space of above
three hundred years, at which the Portugueses or Spaniards shall much
repine.




THE PROPHECIES OF Michael Nostradamus.

CENTURY XI.


IX.

    French.

    Meysinier, Manthi, & le tiers qui viendra,
    Peste & nouveau insult, enclos troubler.
    Aix & les lieux fureur dedans mordra,
    Puis les Phocens viendront leur mal doubler.

    English.

    Meysinier, Manthi, and the third that shall come,
    Plague and new attempt shall trouble them enclosed,
    The fury of it shall bite in Aix and the places there about,
    Then they of Phocens shall come and double their misery.

ANNOT.

These are names of particular persons that are here threatned of the
Plague, as also the City of Aix Capital of Provence, and the Countrey
about it, and after that the City of Marseilles named here Phocens,
because they are a Colony of the old Phocenses in Greece.


XCVII.

    French.

    Par Ville Franche, Mascon en desarroy,
    Dans les Fagots seront Soldats cachez,
    Changer de temps en prime pour le Roy,
    Par de Chalon & Moulins tous hachez.

    English.

    By Ville Franche, Mascon shall be put in disorder,
    In the Faggots shall Souldiers be hidden,
    The time shall change in prime for the King,
    By Chalon and Moulins they shall be all hewed to pieces.

ANNOT.

Ville Franche is a Town five Leagues from Lion; and Mascon another
about the same distance from Ville Franche, and Chalon from Mascon,
and Moulins from Chalon.

The meaning of it is this, that there shall be an attempt from Ville
Franche upon Mascon, by Souldiers hidden in Faggots, that shall be
cut off by the succours of those Chalons and Moulins; which like
did happen in the time of the Civil Wars in France, between the King
and the League, when the Towns stood one against another, but because I
can find nothing of it in the History, I suspend my further judgement
therein.




THE PROPHECIES OF Michael Nostradamus.

CENTURY XII.


V.

    French.

    Feu, flamme, faim, furt, farouche fumée,
    Fera faillir, froissant fort, soy faucher,
    Fils de Deité! toute Provence humée,
    Chasse de Regne, enragé sans crocher.

    English.

    Fire, flame, hunger, theft, wild smoak,
    Shall cause to fail, brusing hard, to move Faith,
    Son of God! all Provence swallowed up?
    Driven from the Kingdom, raging mad without spitting.

ANNOT.

The curiosity of the Author in striving to begin all his words, in the
two first Verses hath made the tense of this Stanza so obscure, that I
believe no body ever did or shall truely understand it, all what can be
gathered out of it, is great threatning of several calamities, that were
to happen upon Provence his native Countrey, as it did a little while
after his death, by the Civil Wars for Religion.


XXIV.

    French.

    Le grand secours venu de la Guyenne,
    S’arrestera tout aupres de Poitiers,
    Lion rendu par Montluel en Vienne,
    Et saccagez par tous gens de Mestiers.

    English.

    The great succours that came from Gascony,
    Shall stop hard by Poitiers,
    Lion surrendred by Montluel and Vienna,
    And ransacked by all kinds of Tradesmen.

ANNOT.

The words and sense of this are plain.


XXXVI.

    French.

    Assault farouche en Cypre se prepare,
    La larme a l’œil de ta ruine proche,
    Bizance Classe Morisque si grand tare,
    Deux differens le grand vast par la Roche.

    English.

    A cruel assault is preparing in Cyprus,
    Tears in my eye, thou art near thy ruine,
    The Fleet of Constantinople and the Morick so great damage.
    Two differents the great wast shall be by the Rock.

ANNOT.

A cruel assault is preparing, signifies the shortness of the time in
which it was to happen, for our Author Prophecied 1555. and Cyprus was
taken by the Turks in the Month of August 1571. Selymus the II.
fifth Emperour of the Turks, where the perfidiousness of the Bassa
Mustapha that Besieged it is remarkable, for having the Town delivered
him upon Articles; First, that the Inhabitants of the City yet alive
should enjoy their lives, liberty, and goods, with free exercise of
Christian Religion, that the Governour Bragadinus with the rest of the
Captains and Souldiers might in safty depart with Bag and Baggage, and
at their departure take with them five pieces of Ordinance, and three
Horses, which soever it should please them to make choise of, and that
the Turks should safely conduct them into Crete, finding them both
Victual and Shipping; yet all these matters agreed upon, and commenced
into Writting, as also by solemn Oaths on both side confirmed; the
perfidious Bassa nevertheless caused Bragadinus to have his Ears cut
off, then caused him to be set in a Chair, and his skin to be flain off
from him quick, his head to be cut from his dead body, and upon the point
of a Spear to be set upon a high place, his skin also stuffed with Chaff,
he caused to be hanged up at the Yards Arm, and so to be carried about.


IV.

    French.

    Deux corps un chef, champs divisez en deux,
    Et puis respondre a quattre non ouys,
    Petits pour grands a pertius mal pour eux,
    Tour d’Aigues foudre, pire pour Eussovis.

    English.

    Two bodies, one head, fields divided into two,
    And then answer to four unheard ones,
    Small for great ones, open evil for them,
    The Tower of Aigues beaten by Lightning, worse for Eussovis.

ANNOT.

Out of this crabbid Stanza we shall pick what we can, and leave the rest
to the judgment of the judicious Reader. First,

The two bodies, one head may be understood either a Monster that was
so, as it did happen once in Italy, as Pareus witnesseth; or of the
union of the two Kingdoms of France and Navarre, under Henry the
IV. or of England and Scotland under King James.

The Tower of Aiguemortes was strucken with the Lightning, a while after
our Author had put out his Prophecies.


V.

    French.

    Tristes Conseils, desloiaux, cauteleux,
    Aduis meschant, la loy sera trahie,
    Le peuple esmeu, farouche, querelleux,
    Tant Bourg que Ville toute le paix haie.

    English.

    Sad Councels, unfaithful, malicious,
    Ill advice the Law shall be betrayed,
    The people shall be moved, wild & quarrelsome,
    Both in Countrey and City the peace shall be hated.

ANNOT.

This is plain.


VI.

    French.

    Roy contre Roy, & le Duc contre Prince,
    Haine entre iceux dissension, horrible,
    Rage & fureur sera toute Province,
    France grand guerre & changement terrible.

    English.

    King against King, and Duke against a Prince,
    Hatred between them, horrid dissension,
    Rage and fury shall be in every Province,
    Great War in France, and horrid changes.

ANNOT.

This is a true picture of the miseries of the Civil Wars in France,
when Charles the IX. King of France, was against Henry King of
Navarre, and the Duke of Guise against the Prince of Condé.


VII.

    French.

    L’accord & pache sera du tout rompue,
    Les amitiez pollues par discorde,
    L’haine euvieille, toute foy corrompue,
    Et l’esperance, Marseilles sans concorde.

    English.

    The agreement and contract shall be broken in pieces,
    The friendships polluted by discord,
    The hatred shall be old, all faith corrupted,
    And hope also, Marseilles without concord.

ANNOT.

This is a second part of the foregoing.


VIII.

    French.

    Guerre & debats, a Blois guerre & tumulte,
    Divers aguets, adveux inopinables,
    Entrer dedans Chasteau Trompette, insulte,
    Chasteau du Ha qui en seront coulpables.

    English.

    War and strifes, at Blois war and tumult,
    Several lying in wait, acknowledgment unexpected,
    They shall get into the Chasteau Trompette by assault,
    And into the Chasteau du Ha, who shall be guilty of it.

ANNOT.

This Prophecy is concerning the Civil Wars of France between the King
and the League.

He saith, at ~Blois~ war and tumult; because the Duke of Guise,
and the Cardinal his Brother were both killed there, at the convention
of Estates by the Kings command, which he calleth here acknowledgment
unexpected, because the Kingdom did own the fact.

The last two Verses are concerning the two Castles or Fortresses of
Bourdeaux, who in those days were sometimes by one party, and sometimes
by another.


LXV.

    French.

    A tenir fort par fureur contraindra,
    Tout cœur trembler, Langon advent terrible,
    Le coup de pied mille pieds te rendra,
    Girond. Garon. ne furent plus horribles.

    English.

    He shall by fury compel them to hold out,
    Every heart shall tremble, Langon shall have a terrible event,
    The kick shall return to thee a thousand kicks,
    Girond. Garon. are no more horrid.

ANNOT.

The two last Verses seem to have a relation to the foregoing Stanza,
and to import, that the Governour of Bourdeaux shall compel them to
hold out, and because Langon, a Town 20 or 30 Miles distant from
Bourdeaux, was of the contrary party, and did annoy sometimes those of
Bourdeaux, it is threatned here to have a thousand kicks for one.

Gironde and Garonne are the two Rivers of Bourdeaux.


LXIX.

    French.

    Eiovas proche, esloigner Lac Leman,
    Fort grand apprests, retour confusion,
    Loin des Nepueux, du feu grand Supelman,
    Tous de leur suyte.

    English.

    Eiovas near, yet seemeth to be far from the Lake Leman,
    Very great preparatives, return confusion,
    Far from the Neveux of the late great Supelman,
    All of their train.

ANNOT.

This is a notable one, directly foretelling the Enterprise or Scalado
made by the Duke of Savoy, upon Geneva: for the better Intelligence
of which, we shall first give the sense word for word, and then set down
the whole History as a piece of Cabinet, that the Reader after so much
tedious and crabbid reading, may have some field to spatiate and recruit
it self.

Eiovas near, Eiovas by Anagram is Savoy, or the Duke of it, who at
that time was near Geneva; yet seemeth far from the Lake ~Leman~,
which is the Lake that passeth through Geneva, called in Latine Lacus
Lemannus. Very great preparatives; because at that time he made
great preparations to Scale the Walls of Geneva. Return; because
he was forced to retire. Confusion; because he was confounded in his
undertaking. Far from the ~Neveux~ of the great ~Supelman~; that is,
an action much unworthy the Kindred of Henry the IV. called here great
Supelman, to whom he was Allied. All of their Train; that is, all
that were with him in that undertaking, did partake of his return and
confusion. Now the History is thus.

About the latter end of the year 1600. the Duke of Savoy having done
before all his endeavours to take the City of Geneva by force, did
resolve at last to have it by craft, and stratagem. He did frame a design
full of Courage, Understanding, and Conduct, as well as of misfortune;
it was long a hatching without being discovered, and although it was
known that he caused Ladders to be made, and that he bought every where
men of courage and resolution, and had a great number of them already at
Chambery, well payed and maintained, waiting for the ripeness of the
design, though Ignorant of it. No body could believe that it was against
those of Geneva; because at that time he did treat with them of the
manner of living friendly, and of the liberty of Trade, having sent to
them for this purpose a few days before the President Rochette, to
treat and advise of a manner of living friendly together, for the ease
of the people. They did so much hearten and relish his propositions
and promises, that although Cities of such condition, do not lightly
believe them that have been their Enemies, nevertheless they trusted
to that, and grew careless of their own preservation, thinking that
there was nothing more powerfull for their security than the treaties
of peace between France, Spain, and Savoy, in which they thought
themselves included, under the name of the confederate with the Cantons
of Switzerland; insomuch that the Dukes subjects went thither so
familiarly, that the day before this Execution some Gentlemen that knew
something of the design, being come into the Town to buy some Horses,
said they would come again the next day to conclude the Bargain, and
others had kept she same Language for other Wares, so fully perswaded
were they of a success, though Heaven, who laugheth at the thoughts of
the proud, had resolved to humble and abase them.

The Governour of Lion had presently notice that the Duke of Savoy
was coming on the side of the Mountain, and carryed with him scaling
Ladders, of which he sent notice to the King, and provided what was
necessary for the defence of Lion, although the same Advice said it
was not for France; yet all this could not hinder the Execution which
was in the mean time a doing. D’Albigny Lieutenant General of the Duke
in those Countreys he had on this side of the Mountains, had made the
Troops to pass, and for that purpose had assigned them of their Quarters
in the Towns of Geneva, in several places, that they might not be
so soon discovered. The Randezvous was at a place called Chambery,
the time of the Execution was reserved to the prudence of the Leader.
The time was not according to the precept of the Parthians, who ever
fought by night, nor of the Lacedemonians, who undertook nothing but
in the time of the full Moon; for it was one of the darkest and longest
nights of all the year, the Troops began their March about six of the
Clock. Brignoles Governour of Bonnes, a small Town in Fossigny,
distant three Leagues from Geneva, was the man that had contributed
most of his own for the performance of this design, whom he thought so
certain, that he said he would die to the world, if he did not live in
Geneva. D’Albigny had set up Watches upon all the passes, to stop all
Travellers, for fear notice should be given of their coming; and of that
of the Duke of Savoy, to whom the Execution had been represented so
sure and certain, in that he should be there himself to reap the Honour
and profit of it, and to end the Triumph that his Grandfather had begun.
He came over the Mountains with five Gentlemen only in his Company, and
the same day came to Tremblures, a Village distant from Geneva about
three Miles; and for all that they could not hinder, but an unknown
Trooper did ride as far as the New-gate, and asked to speak to him that
commanded there, bidding him look to themselves, because the duke of
Savoy, wished them no good, and so retreated galloping. This News was
brought to Blondel, the fourth Syndic of the Town, and who had the
charge of the Guard that year; he answerd, he would provide for that.
Another came afterwards, and told him that the Dukes Forces were about
the Town, but knew not upon what design, and that himself was at Bonne;
he answered, that they were not Birds, and could not fly. Mistrust is
not always be commended; but too much confidence in such business, is
exceedingly dangerous.

Those that were to do the Execution, and to get up first upon the
Ladders, went along by the River of Albe, that the noise of the
Waters might hinder the Sentinals to hear them. Two things did happen,
that were an ill Omen for them, they saw in the Skies unusual fires,
a Hare did many times cross their way, and gave them a false Alarm,
and as many things being considered in the night time, do trouble the
imagination, and that fear maketh one think that Bushes are Squadrons,
and Thistles Pikes, as it did happen once at the Siege of Paris by the
Burgundians. They did discover about Eleven of the Clock some Posts, to
whom the Cloth-workers of Geneva use to nail their Stuffs to dry them.
Those that went formost would have Charged them, thinking they had been
an Ambuscado; from thence they went all along the Rhosne to the Meadow
of Plain Palais. Brignolet, and those that were ordained for the
Scalado followed d’Albigny, who led them down into the Town-Ditch, on
the side of the Corraterie, without being discovered by the Sentinals,
although the Ducks that were in the Ditch, did (for to awake those of
Geneva) what the Geese did at Rome against the French. They went
over the Ditch upon Hurdles for fear to sink in the Mire, and did set
up three Ladders of a wonderful invention; because they could be easily
carryed upon Mules, and they could be folded into so many pieces, that
they could reach the highest wall that is; and besides that, so strong
and firm, that no Ladder of one piece could be more; they had besides
that provided Hatchets, Hammers, Pincers, and other such Tools, to cut
Iron Chains, break Locks, draw Nails and Bars, they had besides several
Petardoes and Petardo-Masters. Fortune, who hath a great power in such
undertakings, did fail them in their need, after she had brought them to
the middle of the City, and made them masters of the streets for above
two hours.

By one of those Ladders went up about two hundred men, Brignolet was
the first, followed by d’Attignac and Sonas, and did carry himself
more valliantly and prudently; having got over the Wall, he surprized
the Sentinal, and drew from him the Watch-word, and his Life, then
threw him over into the Ditch, and stood in his place to stay for the
Round, that he might do as much to him, as he did when it came near him
to give him the Watch-word. D’Albigny, and one Father Alexander a
Scotchman, and a Jesuite, were at the Ladders foot, incouraging those
that went up. The Boy that carryed the Lanthorn saved himself, and gave
notice to the Court de Garde of what had befallen his Master, at which
the Court de Garde was not much moved. This was a doing between One
and Two of the Clock, expecting that of four, at the which they had
proposed to make their greater attempt, and in the mean while to give
time to the succour to draw near, and to the day to break, because all
Warlike Executions done by night, carry always some confusion with
them. No body had gone to bed in the Town with a thought to be awakened
so soon, they rested upon the assurance of the Peace. The undertakers
had a whole hours time to get up, and as much before they met with any
opposition. If d’Albigny had been Within to husband that time better
than did Sonas, Brignolet, and d’Attignac, they might have cried,
the Town is won. About half an hour past two of the Clock, a Sentinal
that was in the Mints Tower, having heard some noise in the Ditch, shot
off his Gun to give the Alarm, which compelled Brignolet to discover
himself, charging all that was in the Court de Garde of the New-gate,
that he might Plant the Petard, and make way for the main Body that was
in Plain Palais. They got very well the Court de Garde, but against
the Rule of War, which commandeth to kill all, they let one escape
that had so much wit as to get up, and to let down the Port-Cullis, to
frustrate the effect of the Petard. The Town was at that time full of
Cries and horrid Houlings, of which the Savoiards should have made
their profit, and increased their courage, as it did weaken that of the
Townsmen, that knew not where to run, some crying one way, some another.
The undertakers lost themselves in the appearance of so happy a success,
those that were without should have given the Alarm at some other Gate,
to divide the Forces of the Town, those that were within made no use
of their Hatchets, Hammers and Pincers, they forgot to set some Houses
on fire; the spirit of astonishment seized upon them, having in their
thoughts the Sack and Plunder of the Town, more than the perfection of
their Conquest; they made only use of a certain croaking like Frogs,
as the Turks use the Bret, Bret, to animate and rally themselves.
Brignolet being compelled to discover himself, marched towards the New
Gate, distant from that place about 200. Paces, and there was wounded,
and died a little after; the Fight began in the dark, and the Court de
Garde was dispersed, one Souldier hearing them call for the Petard, got
upon the Gate, and cut the Rope that held the Port-Culis, and shut up
the Petard between the Port-Culis, and the Gate which they went about
to break open, with their Hatchets and Hammers, at the first resistance
the Petards Master was killed. The Order is such at Geneva, that in
all extraordinary accidents, every Citizen knoweth the place of his
Randezvous, and there goeth with his Arms, and the Town House is never
destitute of Souldiers.

In the mean time the Magistrate cryeth, He that loveth me let him follow
me. Some Countrey Fellows of the Neighbouring Towns, who kept their
watch by turns, being led by some Captains and Citizens, did present
themselves at the New Gate, where they were stoutly received, and beaten
back, and yet the first shot of theirs killed the Petard-Master, who was
much troubled with his Tools. This first Charge would not have driven
them back, if the body of the Citizens had not come, and Charged them so
furiously, that they lost all their Courage; Necessity which strengthens
even those that want Courage, did so animate the Citizens to their
defence, that the undertakers were fained to give back. The more nimble
went again to their Ladders, which proved useless; because the Canon that
was Planted in the Fort of Loye, near the Ditch, had broken them; so
that they left four and fifty dead upon the place, and upon the Curtain
of the Corraterie, and thirteen that were taken alive. If the Town had
had Souldiers in readiness to make a Sally in that Andabatism, the night
being sometimes favourable to such expeditions, those that were at Plain
Palais, would not have retreated in so good an Order.

There were thirteen taken alive, among whom were the Baron of Attignac,
the Lord Sonas, the Lord Chaffardon, upon promise of their Lives, and
to be Prisoners of War, or else they had preserved an Honourable death to
all the promises, to be spared in laying down their Arms; among them was
d’Attignac, who fought valiantly, and gave his order of St. Maurice
to his man, bidding him save himself, being resolved to die with his
Sword in his hand.

The Lords of Geneva would not use them as Prisoners of War; but as
Thieves and Robbers come into the City over the Walls. They said that the
Duke was too generous a Prince for so wicked and perfidious an action:
there was several Opinions concerning their Sentence of Death, the more
moderate would have them be put to Ransom, others would have them be
kept Prisoners, that they might serve for exchange, if some of the Town
were taken in the continuation of the War; but the more violent did
stir the people, in representing unto them the loss of their Religion,
the ravishing of their Wives and Maids, the Massacre, the Sack and
Plunder of the Town, and their perpetual slavery, and the complaints
of the Widows and Children of those that had been killed, were so much
considered, that the more moderate Opinions did not appear injust, but in
how much they tended to Death. They were Condemned to be Hanged, which
is thought the most Ignominious Death: they desired to have their Heads
cut off as Gentlemen, which was granted, but it was after they were
Hanged. Fifty nine were found killed and wounded, who had all their Heads
cut off. In the Ditch there were some Arms found, thirty dead, and four
wounded, all their Heads were cut off, and set with the rest upon the
Gallows. Of the Citizens of the Town there were seventeen found dead,
most of them killed by their Companions in the dark. Their Names were
John Canal, one of the Lords of the Councel, Lewis Baudiere, John
Vandel, Lewis Galatin, Peter Cabriol, Mark Cambiagua, Nicolas
Baugueret, James Mercier, Abraham de Baptista, Daniel Humbert,
Martin de Bolo, Michael Monard, Philip Potter, Francis Bouzesel,
John Buignet, James Petit, Gerrard Muzy, and about twenty wounded.
The Sunday after Dinner, about two of the Clock, 67 Heads, as well of
those that were killed, as of those that were Hanged, were fastened upon
the Gallows, and the Bodies thrown into the Rhosne. The next Tuesday
there was a solemn Fasting day kept, and they began to publish every
where the wonders of this Deliverance.

Here followeth the Copy of their Letter, to the Governour of Lion.

My Lord,

You have known before this by many of your Letters, how his Highness
of ~Savoy~, notwithstanding he knew, and had confessed that we were
included in the Peace made in the year 1600. between his Royal Majesty
of ~France~, and him; hath nevertheless divers times oppressed us,
by detaining our Rents, prohibiting of Trade, other violences and
extortions, refusing to hearken to the just and pressing remonstrances,
which his Majesty hath made him several times in our behalf; but hath
also contrived many designs to surprise us in time of Peace. Now it
is so, that for the encompassing his pernicious design, the Lord
~d’Albigny~, ~Saturday~ last, the Eleventh of this Month, did bring
before our Town, on the side of ~Plain Palais~, about two Thousand men,
Horse and Foot, all choice men, and hath caused to pass about 200. of
them over our Ditch, by the ~Corraterie~, and having set up Ladders one
within another, hath caused them to come into our Town, about three
of the Clock in the Morning, upon ~Sunday~ the Twelfth of this Month,
encouraging them himself, being in the Ditch; so that being come down
into the Town, some went towards our New Gate to force it open, and give
entrance to their Companions, who were in the plain of ~Plain Palais~,
others went towards the Mint Gate, that they might by this means come
into the middle of the Town. But it hath pleased God to look upon us with
his favourable Eye, and to give such a Heart to the Citizens, that they
beat them back, and killed the best part of them taken upon the place,
the rest hath been taken, and since that Hanged by our Order, the rest
threw themselves down from the wall; so that we hear, many of them are
either dead or grievously wounded. It is a wonderfull deliverance of our
God, for which we are particularly bound to Praise him. But as it is
probable, that the said Lord ~d’Albigny~ will continue his ill designs,
by so much the more that we hear his Highness is not far from us, we do
intreat and request by all our affection, that you would be pleased to
consider what prejudice the taking of this place would be to his Majesty,
and to continue us your favour, and assist us with your wise and prudent
advise, ~&c.~

Many did judge of the success of this enterprise by the beginning,
and were more forward to write, than to perform well. The King had
notice that the Duke was Master of the Town, and the manner of doing
was represented with so much felicity and facility, that there was less
reason to doubt of it, than believe it. The Truth was not known, but by
the advise of the Governour of ~Lion~, which came before any discourse
that the Town did publish after its deliverance:

The Duke went Post back again over the Mountains, and left his Troops
within three miles of ~Geneva~ in three places, at ~Tournon~, ~Fossigny~,
and ~Ternier~, he caused his Embassadours to say to the Lord of ~Berne~,
that he had not made that enterprise to trouble the Peace of the Cantons;
but to prevent ~l’Esdiguieres~ to seize upon it for the King of of
~France~, who should have been so powerfull a Neighbour, as would have
given them great occasion of fears and jealousies.

The success of this undertaking made it appear, that God will not have
those Treaties to the assurance of which his name hath been called for
a Witness, to be violated, whatsoever appearance or pretext of Religion
there be.

Thus Gentle Reader thou seest by all these Circumstances the Truth of
our Authors Prognostication.


LXXI.

    French.

    Fleuves, Rivieres, de mal seront obstacles,
    La vielle flame d’ire non appaisée,
    Courir en France, cecy come d’Oracles,
    Maisons, Manoirs, Palais, secte rasée.

    English.

    Brooks and Rivers shall be a stopping to evil,
    The old flame of anger being not yet ceased,
    Shall run through France, take this as an Oracle,
    Houses, Mannors, Palaces, Sect shall be raced.

ANNOT.

This hath a perfect relation to the miseries that followed the general
Massacre of the Protestants in France in the year 1572. when the Rivers
were a stop to the cruelty of the Persecutors, and when so many Houses,
Mannors and Palaces belonging to those of the reformed Religion were
demolished, and to signifie the certainty thereof, he saith in the third
Verse, take this as an Oracle.




To the Curious

READER


Gentle Reader,

Thou shalt take notice, that in this place the covetousness of
Booksellers and Printers, hath in the modern Copies vented new
Prophecies, which they call Prognostications, drawn out of those of
~Michael Nostradamus~, which are so absurd and nonsensical, that they
have been rejected, both by his Son, and the best Wits of this age;
therefore I would not soil the Paper with them, for fear to put such a
course List upon so fine a Cloth, but shall proceed on to give you the
rest of those Prophecies, which truly and undoubtedly belong to our
Author.




Wonderful Prognostications for the Age 1600.

Gathered out of the Notes of Mr.

Michael Nostradamus,

Physitian to King CHARLES the IX. and one of the most excellent
Astronomers that ever were.

PRESENTED

To the Most Victorious and Merciful PRINCE HENRY the IV.

King of FRANCE and NAVARRE, at Chantilly the Constable of
Montmorency’s House the 19th. of March 1605.

By Vincent Seve of the Town of Beaucaire in Languedoc.


To the King.

Sir,

Having some years ago recovered certain Prophecies, or Prognostications,
made by the lately Deceased ~Michael Nostradamus~, from the hands of
~Henry Nostradamus~ his Nephew, which he gave me before his death, and
which I have kept secret till now, that I saw they treated of the affairs
of your Estate, and particularly of your Person and Successors, as your
self may see if you please to take the pains to look upon, and wherein
you shall find things worthy of admiration. I have taken the boldness
(though unworthy) to present them to you, transcribed in this little
Book, no less wonderful then the other two which he made, for in it he
hath treated of what shall happen in this Age 1600. not so obscurely as
he hath done formerly but by ~ænigmes~, specifying so clearly the things
he speaketh of, that one may certainly judge of them, as of things that
are already come to pass. Being therefore desirous that your Majesty
should have the first notice thereof, I thought to discharge my duty in
this as one of your most obedient and faithful Subjects, which I intreat
your Majesty would be pleased to agree, obliging so not onely the body of
one of your faithful Subjects already yours, but also the Soul who shall
continue to pray for the health and prosperity of your Majesty, and of
all those that have relation to it, as one that is, and shall ever be,

    SIR,

        Your most humble, most obedient and faithful Servant and Subject,

                                                                     SEVE.

From your Town of ~Beaucaire~ in ~Languedoc~.




OTHER

PROPHECIES

OF

Michael Nostradamus.

For the Years of this Age 1600.


I.

    French.

    Siecle nouveau, alliance nouvelle,
    Un Marquisat mis dedans la Nacelle,
    A qui plus fort des deux l’emportera,
    D’un Duc, d’un Roy, Gallere de Florence,
    Port de Marseille, Pucelle dans la France,
    De Catherine Fort Chef on rasera.

    English.

    New Age, new Alliance,
    A Markdom put into a Boat,
    Who shall be the strongest of the two to carry it,
    Of a Duke or of a King, Galley of Florence,
    In the Port of Marseilles, a Maid in France,
    Of the Fort Catherine the Head shall be demolished.

ANNOT.

By New Age is meant the Age 1600. to the end of the Century, each age
containing a hundred years.

The new Alliance was the match between Henry the IV. and Catherine
of Medicis, made and celebrated that year.

A Markdom put into a Boat, was the Markdom of Saluces in Italy,
which the Duke of Savoy had surrepticiously taken from the Crown of
France, in the time of the Civil Wars, and would not restore it, for
which there was great Wars between the King of France and the Duke of
Savoy, till at last they agreed that the Duke of Savoy should give
in exchange of it the Countrey of Brescia; and this is the sense of the
second, third, and half the fourth Verse.

Galley of ~Florence~ in the Port of ~Marseilles~, a Maid in ~France~,
signifieth the arrival of Mary of Medicis in the Galleys of France,
and her Landing in the Port of Marseilles.

Of the Fort ~Catherine~ the head shall be demolished; the Duke of
Savoy to plague and bridle those of Geneva, upon whom he hath had
always pretentions, had built a strong Fort two leagues from Geneva,
called the Fort St Catherine, which did so annoy the Town, that they
made their addresses to Henry the IV. who was then in War with the Duke
of Savoy, representing to him that they were not able to relieve his
Army with Victuals, because of the said Fort, whereupon Henry the IV.
took it, and demolished it to the ground.


II.

    French.

    Que d’or, d’argent sera de pendre,
    Quand Comte voudra Ville prendre,
    Tant de mille & mille Soldats,
    Tuez, noiez, sans y rien faire,
    Dans plus forte mettra pied terre,
    Pigmée aidé des Censuarts.

    English.

    How much Gold and Silver shall be spent,
    When Earl shall go about to take a Town,
    So many thousands and thousands of Soldiers,
    Killed, drowned, without doing any thing,
    In a stronger he shall put his foot on ground,
    A Pygmie helped by the Censuarts.

ANNOT.

This Stanza and the next are concerning the Town of Ostend, which was
Besieged by the Arch-duke, and defended by the States of Holland, under
the conduct of Earl Maurice of Nassaw.

In a stronger he shall put his foot on ground, signifieth that Earl
Maurice during the said Siege, took the Sluys another Town of the
Spaniards, thought stronger then Ostend. A Pygmie helped by the
Censuarts, signifieth that Prince Maurice whom he calleth here a
Pygmie in comparison of the Arch-duke, was helped by the French
and English, whom he calleth here Censuarts, to rime with the word
Soldats in the foregoing Verse.


III.

    French.

    La Ville sans dessus dessoubs,
    Renversée de mille coups,
    De Canons, & forts dessous Terre,
    Cinq ans tiendra, le tout remis,
    Et lasché a ses ennemis,
    L’eau leur fera apres la guerre.

    English.

    The Town shall be upside down,
    Overthrown by a thousands shot,
    Of Canons, and Forts under ground,
    Shall hold five years, all shall be returned,
    And surrendred to the enemies,
    Water after that shall make War against them.

ANNOT.

This Stanza is as well as the former concerning the Town of Ostend,
which after three years Siege instead of five (which is falsly printed
here) was surrendred to the Arch-Duke, and presently after like to be
drowned by the Sea.


IV.

    French.

    Du rond d’un Lis naistra un si grand Prince,
    Bien tost & tard venu dans sa Province,
    Saturne en Libra en exaltation,
    Maison de Venus en descroissante force,
    Dame en apres masculin soubs l’Escorce,
    Pour maintenir l’heureux sang de Bourbon.

    English.

    From the round of a Lilly shall be born a great Prince,
    Soon and late come into his Province,
    Saturn in Libra being in exaltation,
    The House of Venus in a decreasing strength,
    A Woman afterwards and a Male under the Bark,
    To maintain the happy blood of Bourbon.

ANNOT.

This Prophecy was concerning Lewis the XIII. King of France, son of
Henry the IV. who was born under the Sign of Libra, and therefore
called the Just; the rest is easie.


V.

    French.

    Celuy qui la Principauté,
    Tiendra par grande cruauté,
    A la fin verra grand Phalange,
    Par coup de feu tres dangereux,
    Par accord pourroit faire mieux,
    Autrement boira suc d’Orenge.

    English.

    He that the Principality,
    Shall keep by great cruelty,
    At last shall see a great Army,
    By a fire blow most dangerous,
    He should do better by agreement.
    Otherways he shall drink juyce of Orenge.

ANNOT.

This is concerning a Governour of the Principality of Orenge, under the
authority of a Prince, which Governour having been long in possession
of that Government, and the Prince being busie in the Wars of the
Netherlands, the said Governour plaid Rex in his absence, so that the
Prince was forced to have him made away privately.


VI.

    French.

    Quand de Robin la traistreuse entreprise,
    Mettra Seigneurs & en peine un grand Prince,
    Sceu par la Fin, chef on luy tranchera,
    La Plume au vent, amye dans Espagne,
    Poste attrapé estant en la Campagne,
    Et l’Escrivain dans l’eau se jettera.

    English.

    When the treacherous plot of Robin,
    Shall put many Lords and a great Prince in trouble,
    Being known by la Fin, his head shall be cut off,
    The Feather in the Wind, friend to Spain,
    Post overtaken in the Countrey,
    And the Scrivener shall cast himself into the Water.

ANNOT.

Two notable Histories are contained in this Stanza, the first is of the
Marshal of Biron; the second is of Nicolas, High Secretary to the
Lord Villeroy, who himself was chief Secretary of State to Henry the
IV. and because they are curious ones, and not to be met every where, we
shall set them down:

The first four Verses are concerning the Duke of Biron, who by
transposition of letters is called here Robin; this man by his Military
Valour and experience, had from a private Gentleman ascended to the
highest degrees of honour and preferment, that his condition was capable
of, for though he were not forty years old, he had attained unto the
greatest dignities of the Kingdom; being fourteen years old, he was made
Colonel of the Switzers in Flanders; a little while after he was made
Marshal of Camp, and after Marshal General: he was admitted Admiral of
France in the Parliament of Tours, and then Mareshal of France in
that of Paris; at the Siege of Amiens he was sole Lieutenant of his
Majesty, though there were many Princes of the Blood in the Army, and to
compleat his greatness, he was made Peer of France, and the Barony of
Biron erected into a Dukedom, not contented with all that, he said,
he would not go to the retaking of the rest of the Towns in Picardy,
unless his Statue were erected in Brass before the Louvre; and in
conclusion, that he had rather die upon a Scaffold, undertaking some
great matters, then to live idle in his own House, and always among these
Bravadoes, he did mix some bold and dangerous words, which he would have
every body to approve of.

When he saw that after the Siege of Amiens the War was at an end, that
Britany was reduced, and that all the Swords were sheathed for a good
while, he thought that having no more occasion to exercise his valour, he
should grow out of credit, and that he should have no more that power,
by which he plaised the King and do without fear all what he did without
Justice. The fire of that great courage finding no work without, began to
work within, that burning desire of being always the first, did fill his
head with flames and smoak of a great design, he complained of the King,
and of the unequal reward of his deserts and services, did publish his
discontents, adding threatnings to his complaints, and spoke of the King
with little respect, that his most intimate friends did judge his words
insolent and dangerous.

It is true it was the vice of his nature, but there were also some of
Fortune, for finding himself filled with all the prosperities, that a
moderate man might wish for in his condition, he found that men loose
themselves by too much happiness. He began then to lend his Ears unto
flatterers, and when they told him that he was the greatest Captain in
France, he answered that he would die upon a scaffold, or he would go
beyond the condition of a single Gentleman, that the goodness of his
sword should give him what Fortune had denied; and the Astrologers to
whom he gave great credit, had foretold him in ambiguous terms, that
nothing could hinder him from being a Sovereign, but the blow of a sword
given by a Burgundian, and though all his life time he had shewed but
little Devotion and Zeal to Religion, yet from that time that he prepared
his soul to the motion of his ambition, he fained himself very devout and
zealous, and began to wear Beads, that the Baron of Lux had given him
in a Tennis-Court, and to declare himself an irreconcilsable enemy to the
Protestants, seeking every where some discontented Spirits, whom he did
encourage with the hopes of a profitable change.

La Nocle Lord of la Fin was then for the troubles of Provence, and
for the quarrel he had with l’Esdigvieres, retired into his House,
threatened of ill usage by the King, enemy to some great ones, loaded
with debts and Sutes in Law. The discontented meet always, either by
design or by chance. The Duke of Biron who knew that he had been
deeply engaged in the business of the late Duke of Alecon, that he had
Negotiated with the Ministers of the King of Spain, and of the Duke of
Savoy, during the Siege of Amiens, that he was full of discontents,
thought that such a one was seeking for a Master. They spoke together and
mixed their grievances, propounding to seek out of the Kingdom what they
could not find within, and to contract an intelligence with the Duke of
Savoy; thus after so many examples of unavoidable dangers, the Duke of
Biron did venture upon a Journey full of Rocks and Shelves, under the
conduct of one who was yet wet with the Shipwrack he had lately made.

The Duke went into Flanders, for the execution of the Treaty of
Vervins, where one Picoté of Orleans spoke to him, and inspired
into him strange desires of raising his Fortune, with those that knew and
admired his defects. The Duke of Biron did hearken to him, and told him
he would be glad to hear him some other time upon that subject. From that
time forwards the Spaniards thought themselves sure of him, and grew
confident, either to have him, or to destroy him: a French Gentleman,
who because of the Civil Wars was retired into Flanders, and had some
imployment in the Arch-Dukes Court, gave the first intelligence of it to
the King, who took it kindly, but sent him word, that the Duke of Biron
had too much courage and honesty to harbour such a wickedness; being come
back again from Flanders the King wished him to Marry, but he shewed
that his inclinations tended to some other party, then that which was
offered unto him, and though he made shew to court the Daughter of my
Lady Lucé, he nevertheless intended to have the natural Sister of the
Duke of Savoy, of which the Knight Breton had spoken to him. La Fin
had in charge from the Duke of Biron, to do all what he could for his
satisfaction. Picoté had made a Journey into Spain, only to know and
receive the propositions. Farges a Monk of the Order of Fisteaux,
went into Savoy, and from thence to Milan to receive Orders how to
pluck of this Plant out of France. Things went very slowly; for the
Spaniards do not easily believe the words of the French, unless they
be with great effects of rebellion and change; but the Duke of Savoy
being at Paris, did wholly put out the Flower de Luces he had in his
Heart, and did dispose him to disturb the King so much at home, that he
should have but little time to dispute him the Markdom of Suluces, upon
that hope the Duke of Savoy neglected the Execution of the treaty of
Peace made at Paris, the War was proclaimed, and the Duke of Biron
took the chief places in Bresse. Being at Pierre Chastet in the
beginning of September, La Fin came to him, and by his order made two
Journeys to St. Claude, where Roncas was. The King had notice of it,
but thought it better to dissemble it than to surprise a man he loved in
his infidelity, he thought enough to bid him come into Savoy, and to
rid himself of La Fin. He did believe that what the King said to him
out of his affection, proceeded from fear, and kept company still with
La Fin, and never went to see the King, but with great many attendants,
refusing to take his lodging near his, that he might have more liberty;
he perswaded the King being at Annessy, that he did desire to discover
some passages, and therefore desired to have some guides of the Countrey,
but it was to send safely Renazé, La Fin’s Secretary to the Duke
of Savoy, to give him intelligence in what state the Kings Army was,
and to bid d’Albigny retreat, who otherwise had been defeated. This
was about the time that the Duke of Biron did intreat the King to
bestow the Government of the Citadel of Bourg on him, whom he should
name. It is the Nature of the great ones that serve Princes to believe
they deserve all, and to become more dangerous than Enemies if they are
refused what they ask for. The King did declare, that he would bestow the
place upon de Boisses. This denial did so trouble the mind of the Duke
of Biron, and put him upon such a strange and diabolical resolutions,
that he resolved one Morning, being yet in his Bed at Chamont, to kill
the King, as it is expressed in the depositions of La Fin and Renazé,
but this took no effect, himself afterwards did abhor the thought of
it. La Fin also went from the Army to conclude the Bargain with the
Duke of Savoy, and the Earl of Fuentes, he treated first with the
Duke of the Spanish Embassador at Yurée, afterwards at Thurin with
Roncas, where also came Picoté, bringing the answers of the Councel
of Spain, upon the propositions of the Duke of Biron, with order to
confer with La Fin, and to perswade him to make a Journey into Spain.
He said plainly, that the King of Spain was resolved to have the Duke
of Biron at any rate. The Duke of Savoy and the Earl of Fuentes
appointed a day to be at Some with La Fin and Picoté; there the
minds of every one were clearly expressed and understood.

La Fin, who was acquainted with all his secret Councels, told the King,
that the Marriage of the third Daughter of the Duke of Savoy, was the
fodder and cement of all the treaty, with a promise of five hundred
thousand Crowns, and all the rights of Soveraignty in Burgundy.

While La Fin treated in Italy the capitulation of the Duke of
Biron, the treaty of Peace was concluded at Lyons.

The Duke of Biron had been always against this Peace; when he saw that
it was concluded, and that the King had heard something of his dealings
with La Fin, he fained to be very penitent of it, and asked the King
forgiveness in the Cloister of the Franciscan Friers at Lyons, and
intreated him most humbly to forgive the evil intentions that the denial
of the Citadel of Bourg had put into his mind. The King did forgive
him, and told him, that he was glad he had trusted to his clemency, and
in the affection he bore to him, of which he would always give him such
tokens, that he should never have occasion to doubt of it. Leaving the
King, he met with the Duke of Espernon, and told him, that he would
impart unto him as unto his best friend, the best fortune that ever he
had in his life, which was, that he had discharged his Conscience to
the King, and that he had forgiven him all what was past. The Duke of
Espernon told him, that he was glad of it, but that it was necessary
he should have his pardon in writing; for such faults could not be so
easily blotted out. What, said he, upon what can I rely better than upon
the Kings word; if the Duke of Biron wanteth an abolition, what shall
others do? So they parted, one thinking that his Lyons Courage ought
not to be used so meanly; the other wiser, remembring that a Lyon is
never so well tamed, but one time or another he will prove still a Lyon,
and at last biteth the hand of him that hath wronged him so fiercely,
that he is for ever avenged of him. The Duke of Espernon had reason
to advise him to take an abolition in writing, and the Duke of Biron
was not too blame to trust to the Kings Word, who certainly would have
forgiven that fault, if he had done nothing since to renew the Memory of
it. But here is once more to be observed a passage that containeth all
the signs of an implacable Spirit. The Duke of Biron being sent for by
the King to receive his commands, and the effects of his clemency, went
from Bourg, and came to lie at Vimy. From thence he wrote a Letter
to La Fin that was at Milan, and then went to Lyons, where he was
received by the King as the prodigal Son, he stayed some time at Lyons,
and went to Vimy again, from whence he wrote another Letter to La Fin
by Farges. As soon as he came to Bourg, he sent to Bosco, cousin
of Roncas to advance the business. This negotiation did continue at
Some between the Duke of Savoy, the Earl of Fuentes, and La Fin.
The Earl of Fuentes carryed La Fin to Milan, and being desirous
to be better informed, upon some points, and finding La Fin not so
firm in his answers, he thought it not good to trust him wholly with the
secret, and resolved to rid himself of him, therefore he sent him back,
and intreated him to see the Duke of Savoy in his way. He had the
good fortune to go by the way of the Grisons, and so through Basle,
Porentru, and Besancon, for Renazé his Secretary, that went through
Savoy, was there Arrested and made Prisoner. The work nevertheless
went on; Alphonsus, Casal, and Roncas, did continue it with the
Baron of Lux, and in the mean time the Duke of Biron plaid his part,
having sent an express into Spain, though he were then with the King,
who loth to loose him, kept him near, carryed him to see the Frontier
Towns, and sent him Embassador into England, where he saw the head of
the Earl of Essex, a late example of justice upon those who will be
feared by their Masters, and abuse their favour. At his return he made a
Journey into Gascony, where he was visited and honoured by the Nobility
of the Countrey, as a Prince; and being come to Dijon, he went into
Switzerland, to make an end of the renewing of the Alliance between
the King and the Switzers, where he continued still his practises with
the Earl of Fuentes, to whom he sent his secretary, under pretence
to send his Pages into the Garrisons of Palma, for the Venetians.
Being come back from Switzerland, he came not to the King to give an
account of his negotiation, excusing himself upon the convocation of the
Estates in the Province. The King, that had some notice of these broils
by Combelles, was infinitely desirous to speak with La Fin to know
the truth of it. La Fin, who was highly incensed, that the Baron of
Lux would have all the fruit of this negotiation, and that Renazée
is kept Prisoner in Savoy, sent Cerezat to the Duke of Biron to
let him know that he could be no longer his Servant, if his Secretary
was not set at liberty, and that he could no longer defer to go to the
King, desiring also to know what he should say upon the things that were
past. He slighted the first of these propositions, and spoke of Renazée
as of one that was not to be reckoned among the living; concerning the
other, he told Cerezat that he was of opinion he might go to the Court
with a small train, and that he should prepare himself at the first to
receive ill language and contempt from the King, which he should sweeten
by intreating him to believe, that the Journey he had made into Italy
had no other design than to visit our Lady of Loretta: And that passing
through Milan and Thurin he had been chared to propound the Marriage
between him and the third Daughter of Savoy, to which he would not
hearken, because the King would take care to provide for him. He did
intreat and adjure Cerezat to tell La Fin, that he should rid himself
of all those that travailed with him, and chiefly of a Curate, and that
he should secure his Papers, if he had not rather to burn them. In a
word, to consider, his life, his fortune, his honour, were in his Hands.

La Fin came to Court at the end of Lent, and saw the King at the
Wine-press of Fountainbleau, and after that at the mid way. He spake
first to the King, after to Villeroy, and after to the Chancellor
in his house at Fontainbleau, and with Rhosny in the Forrest, and
with Sillery in the Wine-press; all with horror saw the writings, and
heard his designs. The King could hardly believe such a wickedness; for
who could have believed that he, who had driven the Spaniard from the
Frontiers of Picardy, would let him in again by that of Burgundy?
that he who had a hundred times beaten and defeated them, could contract
a friendship with them, and conspire with them against the service of his
Prince, and the love of his Countrey? that he who hated them to death,
would have trusted his life in their Hands? He had shewed himself so
much their Enemy, that seeing his Father would not charge the Prince of
Parma in an advantagious place, said aloud, that if he were King for 24
hours, he would cause the head of the Marshall of Biron to be cut off.
He pronounced against his Father the Sentence that was to be executed
once upon him.

La Fin shewed the King so many true and undeniable tokens of this
conspiracy, that he was fained to believe more that he desired. He told
him all what did pass in his Journeys to the Duke of Savoy, and the
Earl of Fuentes concerning the Duke of Biron, saying, that for his
part he would have been glad that the War had continued, that he might
have benifitted himself therein; but finding that his sacred person was
not excepted, and that there were cruel designs made against it, either
to kill him, or to carry him prisoner into Spain, he was resolved to
give him notice of it, choosing rather to disoblige the Servant than
the Master. The King full of clemency and goodness, was extreamly sorry
to see such an unnatural conspiracy: Nevertheless he said, that if the
Conspirators did their duty, and gave him means to prevent the designs of
his Enemies, he would forgive them. If they remember what they owe me, I
will not forget what I owe them; they shall find me as full of clemency,
as they are void of affection: I would not have the Duke of Biron to
be the first example of my Justice, and to be the cause that my Reign,
which hitherto hath been like an Air, calm and pure, should upon a
sudden be disturbed with Clouds and Lightning, and so made a resolution,
that if the Duke of Biron should tell him the truth, he would forgive
him, his Councel was of the same advice, provided he would shew himself
thenceforth as forward for his service against his Enemies, as he had
been earnest to do mischief.

Out of many Papers that la Fin put into the Kings hands, there were
seven and twenty pickt out, which onely spoke of him; the King being
unwilling to discover the rest of the Conspirators, and intending that
the punishment of one should serve for example to all the rest.

The Chancellor kept those Papers with such care, that he caused them to
be sowed in his Doublet, that no body might have a sight of them till it
was time. The Baron of Lux was yet at Fountainbleau, when la Fin
came thither.

The King told him that he was very well pleased, that la Fin had spoken
to him so honourably and wisely of the Duke of Biron, and that he was
confident now, that the intentions of the Duke of Biron were righteous
and sincere. The Baron of Lux did not perceive the Kings anger, so much
the more dangerous that it was hidden; he went back again to Dijon
very well pleased, that the things were always in the same state. La
Fin did write to the Duke of Biron that he had satisfied the King
concerning his actions, and had told him onely what might serve for his
justification. The King did manage this business so prudently, that
the success of it was fortunate, he was well informed of all the Dukes
designs, and desired to hear them out of his own mouth, that he might
have occasion to forgive him, for that purpose he sent to him the Lord
d’Escures, bidding him to come, because he had a mind to trust him with
the Army that he was raising upon the Frontiers, he excused himself, and
said that the enemy being so near, it would be a shame to him to turn his
back, and that the States of the Province were convented at Dijon, and
therefore could not forsake neither the Frontiers nor the States. The
Vidame of Chartres made a Journey to him, and assured him that his
Uncle la Fin had said nothing to his prejudice.

The persuasions of the President Janin were more powerful for
flattering the Duke in his humour, he also made him sensible of the
Kings power and anger in case of refusal; his friends gave him contrary
advices, and desired him not to stir, and to make his peace afar off;
the Bastille is a repairing said they, and the common talk is, that
it is for such one as less thinketh upon it: the King hath been heard
say, that they cut heads in England, and that some shall compel him
upon that example to change his wonted Clemency into a just severity:
in conclusion, they advise him to mistrust all things, and to beware of
those that persuaded him to come; others did assure him of the contrary,
and that his coming should dissipate all mistrusts, suspicions and
jealousies.

The Duke of Biron holdeth here the Wolf by the ears, for let him come
or not, there is danger; by not coming he accuseth himself, and the King
swore he would fetch him himself; and in coming, his conscience was a
witness against him, that the same fault can hardly be forgiven twice. He
seeth la Fin retired into his House and living in peace, and hath so
good an opinion of his own Valour, that he thinketh no body so bold as to
seize upon him. The discourses of reason, the discerning of the truth,
serve no more to a wicked and passionate man, then the Wings serve to a
Bird, when they are clogged with Bird-lime. But now we talk of Birds,
there were several ill Omens of his journey, one Bird of Prey called
a Duck was found in his Closet, no body knowing which way it was come
in; he commanded it to be carefully kept and lookt to, but as soon as
the Duke was upon his journey the Bird died. Presently after the Horse
that the Arch-Duke had given him, called the Pastrave, became mad,
and killed himself, so did another that was given him by the Duke of
Florence, another that the Duke of Lorrain had given him, fell into
a consumption. He came to Fountainbleau when he was no more expected,
and the King was resolved to get on Horseback and to fetch him. As his
Majesty went about six of the Clock into the great Garden, he was heard
to say unto the Lord of Souvray, he will not come, he had no sooner
ended the words, but the Duke appeared among seven or eight, he drew
near, and being yet a pretty way off, he made three great Congies, the
King did embrace him, and the first words he spoke to the King, were
about the delaying of his coming. The King heard but few words of it,
and took him by the hand to walk, and to shew him his buildings; as he
passed from one Garden into another, the Duke of Espernon took occasion
to salute him, and to whisper him in the ear, that in his coming he had
believed his courage more, then the Councel of his friends.

In all the discourse he had with the King, there was observed a great
coldness in the Kings face, and a great deal of fire in the Dukes words.
The King told him of the evil way which he had taken, the end of which
could be nothing but ruine, despair and confusion. The Duke answered that
he was not come to ask forgiveness, not to justifie himself, with many
other frivolous and impudent words, which the Kings presence and his own
duty ought to have restrained. The time of dinner being come, he asked
the Duke of Espernon to dine with him, because his Train was not yet
come; this was the first fault of his carriage, for he ought to dine at
the Table of the great Master, and to harbour in no other House then that
of the King, seeing his own was not open.

After dinner they came to see the King, who having walked one turn or two
about the dinning-room, entered into his Closet, bidding two or three to
go in with him, and saying nothing to the Duke of Biron, who was at the
corner of the Bed near the Chair, taking notice that he was not looked
upon as formerly.

The Marquess of Rhosny went into the Closet, passing by the Duke of
Biron without taking notice of him, and after he had stayed there
about half an hour, he came and saluted the Duke of Biron, and told
him the King asked for him; there he was exhorted not to conceal what
time would ere long discover, and of what he was so well informed, that
the desire he had to know it from himself, was meerly because no body
else should take notice of it. The Duke of Biron who thought that la
Fin had revealed nothing, stood still upon the protestations of his
own innocency, beseeching the King to do him justice, of those who went
about to oppress him with unsufferable calumnies, or to permit him to do
himself reason. The King carried him to the Tennis-court, where the Duke
took upon him to order the match, and said that the Duke of Espernon
and himself would hold it against the King and the Earl of Soisson, the
Duke of Espernon answered presently: you play well, but you do not make
your matches well; which was observed by the King and the standers by.
Supper time being come, he did sup at the Table of the great Master, to
repare the fault he had done in the morning. Every one did perceive that
he was not contented, for he eat little or nothing, and no body spoke to
him, every one holding him already for a cast-away. The King in the mean
while was walking in his Chamber, meditating some great resolution, and
he was heard to say these words, he must either bow or break.

That evening past away so quietly, that many thought it would be a
Thunder with much noise and little hurt. The King commanded the Earl of
Soissons to go to the Duke of Biron, and to do his best to break the
hardness of his heart, and to draw the truth out of him; he went and
intreated him to satisfie the King in what he desired to know from him,
and to be afraid of the Kings displeasure and indignation. The Duke of
Biron for answer told him, that the King could not complain but of the
good services he had done to him, and that he himself had great occasion
to complain of the King who mistrusted him after so many trials and
experiments of his faithfulness, and that he should never have more of
him then he had at his first coming; the Earl of Soissons, seeing his
obstinacy, left him.

The next day early the King walking in the little Garden, sent for the
Duke of Biron, and spoke to him a great while, thinking to overcome
his obstinacy, and to give him means to escape the danger he was running
into; he was seen a great while with his Hat off, his eyes lifted up to
Heaven, smiting his breast, and making great protestations to uphold his
innocency; there appeared then in the Kings face a great deal of anger,
and in that of the Duke of Biron a great deal of fire and violence,
all his words were nothing but threatnings, lightnings, ruines, and Hell
against those that had spoken ill of him; from thence he went to dinner,
and met with a man who brought him a Letter, to advise him to look to
himself, he shewed it to the Captain of his Guards, and made slight of
it, and said, he would be beholding to his valor for his life, and not
to a flight; all the afternoon the King stayed in the Gallery, and
spoke four hours to the Lord of la Curée, the Queen being present and
speaking never a word; the King was in a great perplexity of mind, before
he could resolve himself. The Lords of Vileroy, Sillery and Geure
were seen often to go to and fro, which made some suspect, that it was
to begin by the execution in so great a crime; but the King was against
that, such proceedings had been blamed in his Predecessor, he would have
every body to know that he had authority and power enough to exterminate
his enemies, according to the Laws.

The resolution was taken to have him arrested, and also the Earl of
Auvergne, the King would not have them to be taken in the Castle, but
in their own Lodgings; the Duke of Biron, who was in some suspicion
of it, and had prepared himself to what he could, neither prevent nor
hinder, did imagine that there was no fear of any thing in the Kings
Chamber, and that all the danger should be at the going out, and
therefore by time had provided himself with a short Sword, with which he
promised to make himself room through all dangers. They represented to
the King, that if he were Arrested any where but in the Castle, it could
not be done without bloodshed, and that it was no matter where the Lyon
was taken, so that profit might arise of his prize.

It was perceived that in the same Gallery the King sent for Vitry and
Pralin, two Captains of his Guards, and gave them the order he would
have to be observed for the execution of his commands, and then called
for his Supper. The Duke of Biron was at supper in the Lord Montignys
Lodging, where he spoke more highly and bravely then ever of his Deserts,
and of the friends he had made lately in Switzerland; then began to
fall upon the praises of the late King of Spain, extolling his Piety,
Justice and liberality; Montigny stopt him, saying, that the greatest
commendation that could be given to his memory, was, that he had put
his own Son to death, for endeavouring to trouble his Estate; this word
stopt those of the Duke of Biron, who answered only with his eyes, and
thought upon it with some amazement. After supper the Earl of Auvergne
and the Duke of Biron came to the King, who was walking in the Garden,
the King making an end of his walk did invite the Duke of Biron to
play at Cards, they went into the Queens Cnamber, the Earl of Auvergne
passing by the Duke of Biron told him softly, we are undone; the Game
begun at the primara, the Queen was one of the Gamsters, the Duke of
Biron another, and two more. The King went into his Closet, divided
between two contrary passions; the love he had formerly for the Duke of
Biron, the knowledge he had of his valour, and the remembrance of his
services, excluded all thoughts of his Justice; on the other side, the
fear of troubles in his Estate, the horrid effects of so unnatural a
conspiracy did accuse his Clemency of cruelty, if he went about to prefer
the particular good to the publick, he prayed to God to assist him with
his Holy Spirit, to appease the troubles of his soul, and to strengthen
him with a Holy resolution, that he might do what was for the good of his
people, upon whom he Reigned by his only Grace; his prayer being ended,
all the difficulties that troubled his soul vanished away, there remained
only a firm resolution, to put the Duke into the hands of Justice, if he
could not draw the truth out of him; the Game went on still, the King
took sometimes the Queens Cards, expecting the appointed time. The Earl
of Auvergne was gone to his Lodging, the King sent for him, and walked
in the Chamber, while the Duke thought upon nothing but his play. De
Varennes Lieutenant of his Troop faining to take up his Cloak, whispered
him softly that he was undone; this word did trouble him so much, that
he neglected his play, and oversaw himself, the Queen gave him notice of
it; the King did bid them to give over playing, and commanded every one
to retire, he went into his Closet, and took the Dake of Biron with
him, whose good and bad fortune depended from an answer pleasing his
Majesty, who bid him once for all to tell what he had done with the Duke
of Savoy and the Earl of Fuentes, assuring him, that his clemency
should be greater than his fault. The Duke of Biron answered the King
more proudly than ever, that it was to press an honest man too much, that
he never had any other design, but what he had told him already. Would
to God it were so, said the King. You will not tell me: Farewell, good
night.

As he went out of the Closet, and had passed the Chamber door, he met
Vitry, who with his right hand seized upon the Hilt of his Sword, and
with his left upon his right Arm, saying, The King hath commanded me to
give him an account of your Person, give up your Sword. You jeer, said
the Duke. No my Lord, he hath so commanded me. The Duke of Biron
answered, I pray thee let me speak to the King. No my Lord, the King is
gone to Bed. He saw the Duke of Monbazon, and desired him to intreat
the King, that he might surrender it into his own Hands. The King sent
word to Vitry to obey his commands. The Duke was fained to suffer his
Sword to be taken from him; saying, My Sword that hath done so many good
services! Yes my Lord, give me your Sword, said Vitry. To me, said the
Duke, that have served the King so well, that my Sword should be taken
from me, my Sword that hath made an end of the War, and given Peace to
France, that my Sword, which could not be taken by my Enemies, should
be taken away by my Friends. All these complaints availed nothing; he
ungirted his Sword with his left hand, and gave it to Vitry, looking
about if he could seize upon any other, but care was taken for that.

When he saw all the Guards in order in the Gallery, he thought he should
have been Massacred upon the place, and cryed to them, fellow Souldiers
give me a little time to pray to God, and let me have some Firebrand
or Candlestick in my hand, that I may have the Honour to die defending
my self. He was answered, that no Body would offend him, that his best
defence was to obey the King, who commanded to lead him to Bed, you
see said he, how the good Catholicks are used. He was carryed into the
Arms Closet, where he neither slept nor lay down, but past the night in
blasphemies against God, and reviling words against the King.

Pralin was staying for the Earl of Auvergne at the Castle Gate, and
when he offered to go out to his lodging; stay my Lord, you are the Kings
Prisoner. The Earl astonished, answered I, I? and Pralin answered, yes
my Lord, you, I Arrest you by the King, and make you his Prisoner, give
up your Sword, take it said the Earl it never killed any thing but Boars,
if you had given me notice of this, I should have been in Bed and asleep
two hours ago.

The next day about dinner time the Duke of Biron sent word to the King,
that if he did not take care of the Province of Burgundy, it would be
lost, because the Baron of Lux would let in the Spaniards as soon as
he should have notice of his detention. The King was very much offended
at this message, and said, see the impudence and boldness of the Duke of
Biron, who sendeth me word that Burgundy is lost, if I do not look to
it. His obstinacy hath undone him, if he would have confessed the truth
of a thing that I have under his hand, he should not be where he is. I
wish I had paid 200000. Crowns, and he had given me the means to forgive
him. I never loved any man so much, I would have trusted him with my Son
and my Kingdom. ’Tis true, he hath served me well, but he cannot deny
but that I have saved his life three times; I rescued him once from the
hands of the Enemy at Fontain Francoise, so wounded and astonished with
blows, that as I plaid the part of a Souldier to save him, I was also
fained to make that of a Captain to make the retreat; for he told me he
was not in a case to do it.

The Saturday next the prisoners were carryed to Paris by water, and
put into the Bastille in several Chambers. The Duke of Biron was put
into that, called of the Saints famous, for the Prison of the Constable
of Saint Paul, executed in the time of Lewis the XI. and the Earl in
the Chamber above him.

The care, the order and vigilancy, with which he was guarded, did put
him in some amazement; for his Guards waited on him without Arms, and
served him with a Knife without a point, which made him say, that it was
the way to the Grave (the place of Execution.) But when he knew that the
Hangman of Paris was a Burgundian, he remembred that La Brosse an
Astrologer had foretold him sometimes, seeing his Horoscope, which he
fained to be that of one of his friends, that he should be beheaded, and
Cæsar a Magician, that a blow of a Burgundian given behind; should
hinder him to attain the Kingdom.

The Arch-Bishop of Bourges went to see him, and endeavoured to settle
his Conscience, and to disswade him from some Atheistical opinions that
he had: Villeroy and Sillery went also to see him, and by the Kings
Command, and at his request.

Few days after, the King being at St. Mourder, Fossez, the Lords
la Force, the Earl of Roussy, Brother in Law to the Duke of Biron,
Saint Blancard his Brother, Chasteau-neuf, Themines, Salignac,
St. Angel, Longuac, Friends and Kinsmen of the Duke of Biron, went
and cast themselves at the Kings feet, to implore his Mercy, and that
he would be pleased to moderate the severity of his Justice, requesting
that the same clemency which he had shewed to many others that had as
grievously offended him, would at least save his life, and confine him
into such a place, where he might do no harm, that their whole Kindred
might not be branded with Infamy, and have a regard to his Fathers
service and his, which though they were not equal to his offence, yet at
least to consider, that he was only guilty for his intention.

The King bid them rise, and told them, that their requests were not
displeasing to him. That he would not be like his Predecessors, who
would not suffer any body to intercede for those that were guilty of
high Treason. The King Francis II. would never give a hearing to the
Wife of the Prince of Condé my Uncle. Concerning the clemency you
would have me shew to the Duke of Biron; it should not be clemency but
cruelty, if it were only my particular Interest, I would forgive him, as
I do now with all my heart; but my Kingdom and my Children, to whom I
owe much, are concerned in it; or they might reproach me hence forwards,
that I have tollerated an evil which I might have prevented; my Life,
that of my Children, and the preservation of my Kingdom, are concerned
in it. I will leave it to the course of Justice, you shall see what
Judgement shall be given: I will contribute what I can to his Innocency,
I give you leave to do the same till he be found guilty of high Treason;
for then the Father cannot intercede for the Son, nor the Son for the
Father; the Wife for the Husband, nor the Brother for the Brother. Do
not become odious to me for the love you bear him: As for the note of
Infamy, there is none but himself. Have the Constable of St. Paul, from
whom I derive my Pedigree, and the Duke of Nemours, of who I am Heir
(both beheaded) left any note of Infamy upon their Posterity, should
not the Prince of Condé my Uncle have been beheaded the next day, if
King Francis the II. had not dyed? Therefore ye that are Kinsmen to
the Duke of Biron, cannot be noted with Infamy, if you continue in
your faithfulness, as (I assure my self) you will. And I am so far from
depriving you of your Offices, that if any new one should fall, I would
bestow them upon you: I am more sorry for his fault than you can be; but
to conspire against me that am his King and Benefactor, is a crime that I
cannot forgive, without losing my self, my Wife, my Son, and my Estate,
I know you to be so good French men, that you would not have the last,
and shall take Patience for the first. Thus the King dismissed him, and
sent his Commission to the Court of Parliament, to decide the business.
The Process was framed in the Bastille, by the Lords of Achilles de
Harlay, first President in the Court of Parliament of Paris, Nicolas
Potier second President, Stephen Fleury, and Philibert of Thurin,
Councellors in the same Court. They asked him if he did not write in
Cyphers, he denyed it, then were shewed unto him several Letters, written
and sealed with his own hand, which did witness his Intelligences with
the Spaniard and the Duke of Savoy, and contained advices that he
gave of the wants that were in the Kings Army; How little Money he had
to maintain the War, and to satisfie the Suitzers of the discontent of
the French Nobility, and how several French Troops might easily be
defeated, and that to divert the Kings forces it was necessary to invade
Provence, and did much press upon the 50000. Crowns, and the 4000 men
promised or else said, all is lost. Some of these things he confessed,
and did so intangle and contradict himself, that the Commissioners had
pity on his indiscretion.

He was asked what opinion he had of La Fin, he said he took him for
an honest Gentleman, his Friend and Kinsman, his Evidences being read
to him, and himself brought face to face, he did with the most horrid
Imprecations and Blasphemies in the World deny them, and charged La Fin
with the most horrid Crimes that can be Imagined, calling still God for
a Witness of his Innocency; La Fin stood firm in the confirming of his
Evidence, and did more particularly declare the whole conspiracy. The
Duke answered, that if Renazé were there he would tell the contrary,
Renazé, who had a little while before escaped his Prison in Piemont,
was brought before him, and confirmed all what La Fin had said.

Next to that was brought one of the Kings waiting men, who witnessed,
that having lyen in his Chamber by the Kings command, the first night of
his Imprisonment he had adjured him, by several offers and promises of
rewards, to give notice to his Secretaries to be out of the way for some
days, and to tell the Earl of Roussy his Brother in Law, that he should
send presently to Dijon, to give the same advice to those that were
left there, and above all that if they were examined; they should all
constantly deny that ever he did write in Cyphers.

Thus the business having been thorowly examined, it remained only to
proceed unto Judgment; but the Prisoner being a Peer of France, (the
King having erected the Barony of Biron into a Dukedom) by the Laws the
Prisoner could not be judged, but by his Peers, which being summoned,
and not appearing, the Court of Parliament being authorised by the Kings
Commission, proceeded to Judgement.

The 23 of July 1602. the Chancellor, with the Maisses and
Pontcarré, Privy Councellors, went to the Parliament, where all
the Chambers were assembled together. There he made known the Kings
intention, in a business, wherein the good of the Kingdom was so
much concerned, and represented on one part the quality of a Person,
commendable for his services; but on the other, the foulness of the
Crime, for the Judgement of which the King did rely upon the integrity
and prudence of the Court. The Kings Attorney, and Soliciter, having
represented to the Court, that the Peers summoned, gave no appearance,
and that the Prisoners petition (who asked for Councel), was not to
be received. The Court proceeded to examine the Evidences, whereupon
they sat three times, after which the Prisoner was brought from the
Bastille, by Montigny Governour of Paris, and Vitry, Captain of
the Kings Guards, in a close Barge, covered with Tapistry, and followed
by two other Barges full of Souldiers, and Switzers. He entred into the
Palace, through the Garden of the first President, and rested himself in
one of the Chambers, where he was offered a Breakfast.

The time being come, he was to be heard, the Recorder went and called
him into the Guild-hall, where when he saw one Hundred and twelve Judges
before his face, he was some thing daunted, and was made to sit within
the Bar upon a joint stool; where he sat in such a posture, as stretching
forth his right foot, and having his Cloak under his arm, and his left
hand upon his side, he kept the right one free, either to stretch it
forth to Heaven, or to smite his brest, when occasion served. The
Chancellor did so frame his discourse, that he never named him by his
name, nor that of his qualities.

Of many evidences there was five chiefly urged against him.

The first to have been conversant with one Picotée, born in Orleans,
and refugied in Flanders, to keep intelligence with the Arch-duke, and
to have give him 150. Crowns for two journeys to that end.

The second to have treated with the Duke of Savoy, three days after his
arrival to Paris without the Kings leave, and to have offered him all
assistance and service against any person whatsoever, upon the hope or
promiss of marrying his third daughter.

The third to have kept intelligence with the said Duke in taking of the
City of Bourg and other places, giving him advice how he might defeat
the Kings Army, and destroy his person, with many other circumstances to
that purpose.

The fourth to have sent by Renazée a note to the Governour of the Fort
of Saint Catherine, promising to bring the King before the said Fort,
so near that he might be either killed or taken, telling what cloths
he himself would wear, and what Horse he would ride, that he might be
distinguished.

To have sent several times la Fin to treat with the Duke of Savoy,
and the Earl of Fuentes against the Kings service.

These are the first confessions and acknowledgements that the Prisoner
made before the Commissioners in the Bastille, but now he thinketh, he
may as lightly deny them, as he had unadvisedly before confessed them.

Upon the first Article he answered, that Picoté being once his
Prisoner, had offered his service for the reduction of the Town of
Seurre in Burgundy, and that the King had approved of it, that it is
true he had given him the said sum, but it was as a reward for his pains
and charges in this negotiation, which sum he hath charged upon the Kings
account, with some other small ones, laid out by him for the King; that
since the reduction of the said Town he had not seen Picoté but in
Flanders, when he went thither Embassadour for the confirmation of the
Peace, where the said Picotée came to him with many others, intreating
him he would be pleased to mediate with the King, for the liberty of
returning into their Countrey, and enjoying their Estates, and that he
did wish them to go to the Lords Belieure and Sillery, who would
prescribe them what orders they were to follow in this business, and
never had any other conversation with Picoté.

Upon the second, That he could not have treated with the Duke of Savoy
three days after his arrival at Paris, seeing that himself did not come
there but a fortnigh-after, and that la Fin came but after him, that
all his discourses with him were in publick and before witnesses, and
therefore could not be suspected; that Roncas had sometimes mentioned
to him the Marriage of the third daughter of the Duke, and that he did
impart it to the King; that his Majesty having sent him word by la
Force his Brother in Law, that he did not approve of it, he never
thought of it since; that the intelligence he is accused to have kept
with the Duke of Savoy, is confuted enough by what he did, for when the
King had commanded him to wait and keep company to the Duke in his return
from France, and to shew him the strongest places upon the Frontiers of
Burgundy, he did humbly excuse himself to the King of it, saying, that
he foresaw well enough that the Duke would not keep the Treaty of Peace,
and that it would be a great grief to him to make War against a Prince,
with whom he should have kept company, and made good cheer; and that he
did advise the Baron of Lux to let him see only the weaker places, that
he might not know the strength of the Countrey.

Upon the third, That if he had kept correspondence with the Duke of
Savoy, he would not have undertaken the taking of Bourg, almost
against the Kings will, without any other help then of those that were
ordinarily with him; that of fourty Convoys that were brought to relieve
the Town, he had routed thirty seven, and the other three entered in his
absence; that the King knoweth very well he was offered 200000. Crowns
to let the succours enter into the Citadel of Bourg; that although his
Majesty had commanded him in the time of a Truce made with the Duke of
Savoy, to let those of the Citadel of Bourg have every day 400. Loafs
of Bread, 50. bottles of Wine, half an Oxe, and six Sheep, he did only
let them have fifty bottles of Wine and one Sheep, by which means the
Town was surrendred within the time promised; that if he had had any evil
design against the King and Kingdom, he would not so freely and willingly
put the Town into the hands of him that is now Governour of it; that the
Governours of Places that were in the Duke’s service, and are now in that
of the King, can witness whether he shewed them any favour; that for his
giving advice to the Duke to defeat the Regiment of Chambauld, he will
prove that Chambauld did not come into the Army, but one Month after
the time mentioned in his Calumny; besides that, this advice was without
appearance of reason, for from Chambauld’s quarters to his, there was
at least six days journey, and as much to go to the Duke, and as much
to come back, besides the time required for the marching of the Forces;
therefore all that was a meer invention of la Fin.

Upon the fourth, That he intreated his Majesty to call to memory, that he
was the onely man who dissuaded him to go and view the Fort, representing
unto him that there was in it extraordinary good Gunners, and that he
could not view it without great danger, and upon that he offered the King
to bring him the next day the Plat-form of it, and to take it with 500.
Musquettiers, and that himself would be in the Head of them.

Upon the fifth, That it was true all the evil he had done was in two
Months time that la Fin had been with him, during which, he did hearken
and write more then he ought: but that with the same he had written, he
had so long served the King, that it was enough to prove the sincerity
of his intentions; that the refusal of the Citadel of Bourg, which he
thought the King had promised him, had put him into such a discontent,
that he found himself in a capacity to hearken to any thing, and to do
any thing, that if he had been a Protestant, it may be the place should
have been refused him no more then it was to de Boaisse, who was such
an one, as he told the King himself at Lyon; that la Fin had also
once told him, that the King speaking of him, and of his Father, said,
that God had done well for to take him out of this world when he was
killed, for he was a very chargeable and unprofitable servant; and for
the Son, it was not all Gold that shined; that these words had so much
incensed him, that he could have found in his heart to be all covered
with blood. Upon that the Chancellor asked him of what blood he meaned?
he answered, of my own: desiring not to live any longer, after he had
heard such reproches, as blemished the services of his Father and his
own; that nevertheless his anger and discontent went never so far, as to
attempt upon the King; that his fault was only in words, and it may be
little in Writting; that his Majesty seeing with how much ingenuity he
did acknowledge his fault, had forgiven him all what was past, in the
presence of the Lords Villeroy and Sillery, and that if since that
time he was found to have done any thing amiss, he would blame his Judges
of Injustice, if they did not condemn him to death, that if he had done
nothing amiss since, he thought the Kings pardon to be sufficient for
what was, and if there was need to ask for it again, his knees were as
supple and plyable as ever.

But a Letter, which he had written to la Fin since the pardon of
Lyon, and the Birth of the Dolphin, did spoil all, for it was a
manifest evidence of the continuation of his ill designs, and the
Chancellor having produced it, he answered, he would never deny his
hand, but that Imbert and Renazée Domestick Servants to la Fin
could counterfeit it; that though he might have some ill thoughts, he
had always well done; that although the King would not forgive him this
fault, it was not in the power of men to condemn him justly for single
words, which were contradicted by the effects; that his consolation was
in his misfortune, his Judges were not ignorant of the services he had
done to the Kingdom, which he had Sealed with five and thirty wounds;
that his body whose life and death was in the disposition of their
Justice, had not a vain but had bleeded for their service, and to restore
them into their places, from whence the League had driven them; that the
hand which had written the Letters produced against him, was the same
that had done contrary to what it did write; that he had written and
spoke more then he ought, but that it could not be proved he had ever ill
done; that there was no Law that punished with death the lightness of a
single word or motion of the thoughts; that anger and discontent had made
him capable of saying and doing any thing, but that his reason had not
given leave to say or to do, ought but what deserveth to be commended;
which words were as carefully considered, as he repeated them often with
several Oaths and Imprecations.

Upon that the Chancellor having asked him why then he did not open
himself more to the King, who desired him with great affection to do
it at Fountain-bleau, seeing he knew in his conscience to have done
nothing against his duty since his pardon. There he cut himself in his
answer, and said he thought la Fin had revealed nothing of what was
between them, and that he had lately assured him so with Oaths and
fearful imprecations, that he would never have thought la Fin had been
such a damnable man, as to reveal that which with so many deep Oaths and
Imprecations they had promised to keep secret between themselves; that
having propounded the question to a Monk of the Order of Minimes at
Lyon, whether he might with a safe conscience reveal what was between
them, and what he had promised with Oath to la Fin to keep secret,
because he suspected that la Fin would deceive him, and tell all to
the King, and so ruine him. The Minime had answered, that seeing they
had no more intention to put in execution the things they had projected,
he was not to reveal them, and if la Fin did it, he should go to Hell,
and himself to Heaven; that he did so firmly believe this, that although
the Archbishop of Bourges had visited him in Prison, and alledged many
reasons to the contrary, yet his soul was so settled in that belief, that
he thought it was only the part of an Atheist to swear with intention to
deceive.

Upon this he begin to accuse la Fin of the most execrable crimes that
a man is capable of, saying that he made use of Renazée for Sodomy
that he was a Witch, and had ordinary communication with the Devils,
that he had so be witched him with enchanted Waters and Wax Images, that
spoke, that he was constrained to submit himself to all his will; that
he never spoke to him but whispering, and in unknown words, and after
he had kissed him in the left eye, and he could not deny but he had
shewed him a Wax Image, speaking and saying, Rex impie morieris, thou
shalt die ungodly King, and called him continually his Master, Lord,
Prince and King; that he was a false Coiner, and had persuaded him many
times to attempt upon the King, but that he would never hearken to it,
that the quality of the Accusators was to be considered, who not only
were partners, but instigators of the Fact; that certainly the Duke of
Savoy was his mortal enemy, for having since his pardon left of all
his intelligences with him, and seeing that after a long detention he
had released Renazée, to come and to be a witness against him; that
the King had forgiven him at Lyon and that upon his acknowledging many
times to the King, that the refusal of the Citadel of Bourg had very
much incensed him, his Majesty did comfort him with these words. Marshal
never remember Bourg, and I will never remember what is past, that in
22 Months after he had not offended, that if he had continued his ill
designs, he might have done it easily in England and Switzerland.
That above 100. Gentlemen shall be Witnesses of his first Embassy,
and for the second, he desireth no other Witnesses than the Kings
Embassadors themselves, that if they would be pleased to consider how
he was come, and in what case he had left the Province of Burgundy,
it was impossible to have an ill opinion of his designs; for there was
not one Souldier in all the Countrey, and at his going away he gave no
other charge to the Commanders and Captains, than to serve the King
faithfully, that every one disswaded him to come to Court, and in the
way he received many Letters to that purpose, that he was come upon the
Kings word, trusting upon his own Conscience and Innocency. If the King
be not pleased to consider my services (said he to the Court) and those
assurances he hath given me of his Mercy, I acknowledge my self guilty of
Death, and do not expect my life from his Justice, but from yours, (my
Lords) who will remember better than he what dangers I have undergone
for his service. I confess I had a mind to do ill, but I never proceeded
to effects: It would be a hard matter if I should be the first in whom
thoughts should be punished; Great offences require great clemency. I
do implore that of the King, and nevertheless I am the onely one in
France, that is made an example of his severity, and that can have no
hope in his clemency, which he never denyed to those that had done worse:
However I trust more in you my Lords, than I do in the King, who having
heretofore looked upon me with his Eyes of love, looketh upon me now with
those of his anger, and thinketh it a Vertue to be cruel unto me, and a
Vice to excercise upon me the act of clemency.

Thus pleaded the Prisoner, with so much eloquency and boldness, that if
his Judges had not seen evidently the truth of the fact, under his own
Hand and Seal, the respect of his first condition might have perswaded
them to believe his Innocency, and to take compassion of his ruined
fortune.

The Court did hear him as long as he would speak, with so much patience,
that never a man had the like audience. The Prisoner spoke so much, that
his last reasons were found contrary to his first, his allegations did
not shew his Innocency; for the Embassadors themselves which he took for
Witnesses of his carryage in Switzerland, did report many words of his,
which shewed his anger and passion. Besides the King had not given his
word, that he might come in Safety, and those Letters which he alleadged
for his justification, did prove the continuation of his treacherous
designs, seeing that he had sent la Fin and Hebert, to Turin and
Milan, since the pardon, He could not then expect but Justice, in a
case where neither passion nor favour could alter Judgment: Nevertheless
he shewed himself much satisfied with his answers, and therefore being
come back again to the Bastille, he passed the rest of that day, and
the two next, to relate unto his Guards the questions of the Court and
his answers therereunto, counterfeiting the gesture and the words which
he Imagined the Chancellor had spoken after his going away, though that
grave and venerable old man neither said nor did any thing, but what
was becoming to his Age and quality, having shewed himself as full of
compassion, as the prisoner was of his vanity; for when he was nearer to
death he thought less upon it, and thinking himself the only man capable
of commanding an Army, he found some fault in those that were thought
capable of it, saying, that one was unhappy in his undertakings, the
other was not respected by the Souldiers, such a one was a brave man, but
he wanted experience, and another that hath both was a Protestant. To
conclude, he did so please himself with his own praise and deserts, that
he thought no body could come near him, and that he was so useful to the
Kingdom, that it would be a great Crime to think to undo him.

He had spoken so long the 27 of the Month, that there was no time left
to gather the Voices: The Chancellor therefore went into the Palace the
29 following to gather the Voices of the Judges. Fleury the reporter
of the Proces, did conform his opinion to the conclusions of the Kings
Attorney, all the rest agreed to it, either by Words or by Signs, and
all the proofs necessary for the verification of a Crime meeting in this
case, as his Answers, Confessions, Writings, Letters, Instructions, and
Evidence of Witnesses not reproached; It was found, that the unnatural
Conspiracy against the State, the detestable attempt upon the Kings
Person, makes him guilty of high Treason in the first and second degree.

He confesseth he had evil intentions, it is enough, the Laws do punish
the Councels, the resolutions, and the effects; for if the Traitor be not
prevented, time may give him the opportunity to accomplish his Design
and Will, and the Will of a Subject in point of State, doth depend
immediately upon that of the Prince. He sayeth moreover, that without the
Kings Mercy he is undone, and that if he would have put in Execution the
ill designs that were propounded to him against his Majesty, he should
have been gone long ago: Did he ever give notice of them to the King or
to any body else. If the Prisoner had brought to pass his intent, we
might have said, farewell State, farewell Justice, it is too late to
believe the Conspiracy against Princes, when they are murdered by the
Conspirators.

He hath well Served the King, it is true; but his Offices and Dignities
did call him to that Duty, he hath had notable rewards for it, and from
the time that he hath shewed himself so unfaithfull, he hath diminished
the lustre of his deserts. His deserts had made him capable of the first
dignities of the Kingdom, but the merit of them is vanished away, by the
greatness of his Crime.

And what is the State beholding to him, if after he hath contributed
so much for its restauration, he goeth about to turn up side down the
Foundation of it, and to betray it to the Enemies. It is nothing to begin
well unless you end well, the actions are judged by the end: Those that
have deserved best of the States, are the most severely punished when
they fall into Sedition and Rebellion. There is many sheets of Paper in
the Hands of the Court, containing in them one hundred advices given to
the Enemy, the least of which is capable to make him guilty.

The Prisoners quality is not considerable in this case; Justice is blind
to all distinctions, and rather considereth the offence according to
the quality of the offender; Crimes of high Treason are not considered
by things past, but by things present and that are to come; we must not
put in an account what he hath done, but what he had a mind to do. The
quality of a Duke and Peer of France, of Knight of the Kings Order, of
Marshal, doth not exempt him from the Law, and from being judged as an
Enemy to the State, and to the Majesty of the Prince, seeing he would
have troubled the State, and attempted upon the Kings person. Who in
France besides is more obliged to the King? the greater then is the
Obligation, the greater the ingratitude. God forbid that the respect of
the quality should stop the course of Justice: a Limb must be cut off to
save all the body.

But his offence hath been forgiven: The pardon cannot extend but to the
things that are confessed; but he acknowledgeth himself that he hath not
told all, therefore he hath confessed as little as he could, his own
confessions Witness, he only asked forgiveness, that he might continue
his Crimes with more security: Besides, he would not acknowledge his
fault to the King, for all the King promised to forgive him, and lately
he told the Court, he did not believe that la Fin had revealed what was
secret between them; and thought he would have kept his word, which he
had confirmed with so many Oaths, and that if he had doubted of it, he
would have cast himself at his Majesties Feet as readily as he, and asked
him forgiveness. It followeth then that there was some thing left behind
that was not confessed: Thus he accuseth himself, thinking to excuse his
fault; besides, he mistaketh himself thinking to persuade the Court,
that since the pardon he hath done nothing amiss, for the Pardon was in
January 1600. and here be Letters of September last, by which he
recalleth la Fin, telleth him, he will think no more upon the Vanities
that were past since, God was pleased to have given the King a Dolphin.
It is apparent then that he hath employed la Fin at least since the
Pardon, till the birth of the Dolphin, and la Fin maintaineth that
there was a note quite to the contrary, and that they did continue their
intelligences and practises unknown to the King. That the Duke did recal
him, fearing he should discover the Conspiracy, when a man continues in
his faults and abuseth his Pardon, the last fault payeth for all.

Besides, the Court hath not seen that Pardon, he oughted to have produced
it in writing under the Kings Hand and Seal, and to forgive him once
more, would put him into such a condition, as to contrive always Treasons
against the State; the remedy of a present evil is not to be neglected
upon the hope of an uncertain good; he is in a case to be no more useful;
nothing can be expected from his courage but revenge; he that can bring
no profit by his virtue and faithfulness, must do it by being made an
exemple.

Such were for the most part the reasons of the Court, according to which,
and to the conclusions of the Attorney General, the Chancellor did
pronounce Sentence of death against the Prisoner; some were of opinion
that la Fin should be arrested, as one that could not justifie himself,
for having concealed such a damnable Conspiracy, till he saw that the
Spanish affairs went to wrack. The Chancellor did moderate these
opinions, representing that the Conspiracy was not yet wholly discovered,
and that such things would hinder the rest of those that knew some thing
of it to reveal it; that a man that saveth the Kings Person and his
Estate, ought rather to be rewarded then punished. And in confirmation of
this, the King sent Letters to la Fin, by which he assured him, that
such a service done to him and his Kingdom, should never prove his ruine.

The Court stayed onely for the Kings intention upon the execution of the
Sentence, which Sillery had carried to St. Germain. The Scaffold was
ready to be set up in the place of Greve, but the execution might have
proved dangerous, in the middle of so much people of different humors and
tempers; and already there was a rumour, as if some body should throw
him a Sword, with which he should make himself a passage, or else have
died with a blow less shameful then that of the Hangman; upon his friends
intreaty the execution was ordered to be done in the Bastille.

The next day about noon, the people knowing that the Sentence was past,
went some to the Greve, thinking that the execution should be done
there, others to St. Antony street, to see the Prisoner pass by; he
saw from his Chamber that multitude, and guessed that he was to be the
Spectacle of those Spectators; here the anguish of the Grave began to
beset him, and drawing a consequence from the shadow of death, that the
body was not far of; he sent Baranton a Scotish Gentleman to intreat
the Marquess of Rhosny to come to see him, or if he could not come, to
sue for his Pardon to the King. He sent him answer, he could do neither,
and that he was extreamly sorry for his misfortune, that if he had
believed him at his coming to Court, he should have confessed what the
King did desire to know of him, for by concealing of it, he did hinder
the King to give him his life, and all his friends to sue for it.

The next day last of July 1602. the Chancellor, the first President,
Sillery, three Masters of Requests, some Officers of the Chancery,
Rapin Lieutenant of the short Gown, his Lieutenant, Daniel Voisin
Register of the Court of Parliament, six Sergeants, and seven or eight
more went to the Bastille, about ten of the Clock in the morning, as
soon as they were come in the Chancellor commanded that the Prisoners
Dinner should be carryed, without giving him notice of his coming, and
in the mean time he and the first President made a List of those whom
they would have to be present in that action: Some Presidents, three
Masters of Requests, three Auditors, six Serjeants of the Parliament,
the Lieutenant Civil, the Kings Attorney at the Chastelet, Rapin and
his Lieutenant, the Knight of the Watch, the Prevost of the Merchants,
four Aldermen, four Councellors of the City, and some few others, to the
number of fifty.

About noon the Prisoner looking through the Grates of his Chamber
Windows, perceived the Wife of Rumigny, Captain of the Castle, weeping
with her hands up and guessed that those Tears were drawn by the
compassion of his Fortune. He was confirmed in his opinion, when he saw
the Chancellor followed by the Serjeants, Rapin and his Lieutenant, and
some others go through the Bastilles Yard into the Chappel, then he
began to cry aloud, O my God I am a dead man, ah, what injustice it is to
put an Innocent Person to death, thereupon he intreated Rumigny to tell
his Brothers, Sisters and Kindred, that they should not be ashamed of his
death, because he was Innocent of that he was accused.

The Chancellor commanded he should be brought down into the Chappel,
where as soon as he saw the Chancellor, are you come, said he, to
pronounce me my death: The Chancellor saluted him, then put on his Hat,
the Prisoner stood bare headed, and began to speak first. Ah my Lord
Chancellor, is there no pardon? is there no Mercy? such and such (whom
he did name one after another) have committed such offences and yet have
been pardoned. What? you that look like an honest man, have you suffered
that I should be so miserably condemned? ah! my Lord, if you had not
told the Court that the King would have me to die, they would not have
condemned me so. My Lord, my Lord, you could have hindred that evil, and
you have not done it, you shall answer for that injustice before all the
rest of the Judges that have condemned me, and saying so, he stroke the
Chancellor upon the Arm. Ah! what a great service the King doth this
day to the King of Spain, to rid him of such an Enemy as I was, might
I not have been kept within four Walls, till some occasion had offered
where I might have been useful? Ah my Lord, have you forgot my fathers
love to you so much, as not to give notice to the King of what I say,
and what dammage he suffereth in loosing me: I am yet as willing as ever
to do Service to the Kingdom, you could let him know so much, he hath
so good an opinion of you, I am sure he would believe you: A Messenger
could quickly go thither and back again; what shall a thousand Gentlemen
my Kinsmen say? doth he think that after my death they can do him any
service? and what if I had been guilty, would I have come upon those
false assurances that President Janin that great Cheat gave me, when
he told me, that businesses were so ill mannaged in France, that it
was fit I should see the King and tell him of it, who at my perswasion
would settle them in better order: I have neglected all the advices of my
friends to hearken unto his perswasions. I have trusted to that cursed
Traitor la Fin, who writ to me that I could come in all safety, and
that he had told the King nothing but of the Marriage that was propounded
to me with a daughter of Savoy, that the King would receive me with
all kindness. What then? the goings to and fro of many, the reasons
of those who advised me to come, and the Kings Letters, were they all
baits to catch me: I am well served to have trusted to much upon his
Word, I could have sought and got other securities, if I had not trusted
to my Innocency; I am come upon the confidence of my integrity since
his pardon. Ah! doth he not know that he hath forgiven me; I have lied
some evil designs, I have hearkened, I have written, I have spoken, I
confessed them all at Lyon, he did assure me never to remember it, and
did exhort me that from hence forwards I should commit nothing that
might compel me to have recourse to his clemency: Nevertheless I am now
accused of things that are blotted out by his pardon; I have not offended
him since, unless it be in that I desired War rather than Peace, because
my humour is not peaceable, had not the King at that time reason to
approve of it? if this Crime deserveth death I fly to his clemency, I
implore his Mercy. The Queen of England told me, that if the Earl of
Essex would have humbled himself, and asked forgiveness, he should have
obtained it: I do, being Innocent, what he would not do being guilty. Ah!
Shall all Mercy be put out for me; those that have done worse have found
Grace and Mercy: I perceive what it is, I am not the more guilty but the
most unhappy, and the King, who hath been so sparing of his Subjects
lives, hath a mind to be prodigal of mine.

To conclude, he forgot nothing of what might be said by a soul pierced
with grief spite, anger, and violent threatning, in exclamations and
revilings against the King and his Parliament, in reproaches against the
Chancellor, that he had more contributed to his condemnation than to his
absolution, in words that are not fit to be spoken nor related.

His words ran so fast that the Chancellor could not stop them:
Nevertheless he took occasion to tell him, his passion suggested him many
things without appearance of reason, and against his own judgment, that
no body had known his defects better than he, and that he could have
wished his faults had been as unknown as dissembled, that the knowledge
of them had been so visible and apparent, that his Judges had more ado
to moderate his punishment than to inflict it. That Sentence was given
upon the proofs of several attemps he had made against the Kings Person
and his Estate, and for having kept intelligence and correspondency with
the Enemies of the Kingdom, of which he had been found guilty, that if he
had concealed the truth in the answers to his accusations, he should now
reveal it being so near to his end, and that for these causes the King
did ask his Order of Knighthood, and his staff of Marshal of France,
with which he had formerly honoured him: He pulled the Order out of his
Pocket and put it into the Chancellors hands, Protesting and Swearing
upon the Salvation of his Soul, that he never had broken the Oath he made
in receiving it, that (it is true) he had desired War more than Peace;
because he could not preserve in Peace, the reputation he had got in War,
as for the Staff, he never carryed it: Nevertheless by the Oath that the
Knights of the Holy Ghost take, they are bound to take no Pension, Wages
nor Money from forrain Princes, and to engage themselves in no bodies
service but the Kings, and faithfully to reveal what they shall know to
be for or against the Kings service.

After that the Chancellor exhorted him to lift up his thoughts from Earth
to Heaven, to call upon God, and to hear patiently his Sentence.

My Lord (said he) I beseech you do not use me as other men; I know what
my Sentence beareth, my accusations are false, I wonder the Court would
Condemn me upon the Evidence of the most wicked and detestable man that
is alive; he never came near me without Witchcraft, nor never went from
me till he had bewitched me, he did bite my left ear off, and made me
drink inchanted waters, and when he said, that the King had a mind to rid
himself of me, he called me his King, his Benefactor, his Prince, his
Lord, he hath communication with the Devils, and hath shewed me a Wax
Image, speaking these words in Latine, Rex impie morieris, ungodly King
thou shalt die. If he hath had so much power by his Magick, as to make
an inanimate body to speak, it is no wonder that he should make my Will
conformable to his.

Here the Chancellor stopt him, and told him, that the Court had well
considered his answers, and his Letters, that he ought not to find fault
with his Sentence, that it had done him the same justice as a Father
should do to his son, if he had offended in the like manner. He had
scarce spoken these words when the other answered, what Judgment? I
have been heard but once, and had no time to tell the fiftieth part of
my justification; if I had been heard at large, I could have made it
clearly appear that la Fin is such a one as I say; what Judgment upon
the Evidence of a Bougerer? of a Rogue that hath forsaken his Wife, of
a treacherous and perfidious man, that had Sworn so many times upon the
Holy Sacrament, never to reveal what was between us, of a Knave that
hath so often counterfeited my Hand and Seal: It is true, I have written
some of those Letters that were shewed me, but I never intended to put
them in Execution: and the rest are falsified: Is there not many that
can counterfeit so well the Hand and Seal of others, that themselves can
scarce distinguish them. It is well known that the Lady Marchioness
of Vernevil hath lately acknowledged that to be her own hand, which
she had never written. My Heart and my Actions have sufficiently
countervailed the faults of my Hand, and of my Tongue. Besides, the King
hath forgiven me, I do implore his Memory for a Witness. You say I have
been found guilty to have attempted upon the Kings Person; that is false,
that never came into my mind, and I knew nothing of it till that la Fin
did propose it to me before St. Katherines Fort, six or seven days
after the Siege, if I had been thus minded, I could have easily brought
it to pass; I was the only man that hindred the King to go before the
Fort: If my services had been taken into consideration, I should not have
been thus condemned: I believe that if you had not been present, the
Parliament would not have judged me so rigorously; I wonder that you,
whom I thought to be prudent and wise, have used me so cruelly; it would
have been more honourable for your quality and old age to implore for me
the Kings Mercy, than his Justice. There is Dungeons here where I might
have been kept bound hand and foot; I should have at last that comfort to
pray for those who should have got me that favour from the King. If I had
been but a single Souldier, I should have been sent to the Galleys; but
because I am a Marshal of France, I am thought to be as dangerous a man
to the State, as I have been useful heretofore. My life is sought after,
I see there is no Mercy for me; the King hath often forgiven those,
who not only intended to do evil, but had done it; this Vertue is now
forgotten, he giveth occasion now to the World to believe, that he never
used clemency or forgiveness, but when he was afraid. I was of opinion,
that if I had killed one of his Children he would have forgiven me. Is it
not pity that my Father should have run so many dangers, and at last died
in the field to keep the Crown upon his Head, and that now he should take
my head off my Shoulders, is it possible he should forget the services I
have done him? doth he not remember the conspiracy of Mantes, and the
dangers he should have been in if I had taken the Conspirators part? Hath
he forgotten the Siege of Amiens, where I have been so often among the
fire and Bullets, neglecting my own life to preserve his, I have not a
Vein but hath been open to preserve his own Blood, I have received five
and thirty wounds to save his life; he sheweth now that he never loved me
but when he had need of me, he taketh away my head, but let him beware
that the Justice of God doth not fall upon his. My Blood shall cry for
revenge for the wrong that is done me to day, I call the King of Spain
and the Duke of Savoy to Witness, if I know any thing what is laid to
my charge. La Fin himself did shew me sometimes a Catholick List of
about fourscore Gentlemen, who received Pension from the King of Spain,
I had never so much curiosity as to read it; let him be put to the rack
he shall tell many particularities of it; the King within a little while
shall perceive what he getteth by my death; I shall at last die a good
Catholick, and constant in my Religion, I believe that’s the cause of my
death.

The Chancellor seeing that all his discourses were full of passion,
vanity and repetitions, and void of reason, and were like an impetuous
Torrent that cannot be stopt, and that all his words were nothing but
reproaches against the King and the Court of Parliament, blasphemies
against God, and execrations against his Accusers; said that his business
called him away, and that in his absence he would leave him two Divines
to comfort him, and to dispose his soul to leave quietly this World, for
the enjoying of a better.

As the Chancellor was going out, the Prisoner begged of him that he might
have the liberty to make his Will, because he did owe much, and much
was owing to him, and he desired to satisfie every body. The Chancellor
answered, that the Recorder Voisin should stay with him to write his
Will under the Kings good pleasure. And as the Chancellor spoke to
Voisin, the Prisoner turning to Roissy, Master of Requests, asked him
if he were, one of those that had condemned him: my Father hath loved
you so much, that though you were one, yet should I forgive you. Roissy
answered, my Lord, I pray God Almighty to comfort you.

They went out, and he with a quiet mind and free from passion, did
dictate his Will in what form he would, with the same Garbe, as if he
had been making a Speech at the head of an Army; he remembred his friends
and servants, and did not forget the Baron of Lux, whom he loved above
all the rest. He lest eight hundred Livers a year to a Bastard of his,
whom he begot of a woman that he left with Child of another, to which
child he left a Mannor near Dijon that had cost him six thousand
Crowns, he disposed all the rest of his Debts, and answered modestly, and
without confusion to all the Notes and Bills that were brought him about
his affairs. Took three Rings off his fingers, and intreated Baranton
to give them to his Sisters, two to the Countess of Roussy, and the
other to that of Saint Blancard, desiring they would wear them for
his sake; he distributed in Alms about 200. Crowns that he had in his
Pocket, fifty to the Capuchines, fifty to the Fueillants, fifty to
the Minimes, and the rest to several poor people.

The Will being made, the Recorder put him in mind how my Lord Chancellor
had told him he was condemned to death, and that according to the
ordinary forms of the Law, he must have his Sentence read to him; that
this action required humility, therefore willed him to kneel before the
Altar, leaving off hence forth all thoughts of this World, to think upon
the Father of Mercies; he kneeled with the right knee upon the first step
of the Altar, and heard it read as followeth:

    Seen by the Court, the Chambers being assembled together,
    the Process extraordinarily made by the Presidents and
    Councellors, appointed by the King under his Letters Patents,
    dated the 18 and 19 of ~June~, at the request of the Kings
    Sollicitor General, against the Lord ~Charles~ of ~Gontault~
    of ~Biron~, Knight of both Orders, Duke of ~Biron~, Peer and
    Marshal of ~France~, Governour of ~Burgundy~, Prisoner in the
    Castle of ~Bastille~, accused of high Treason, Informations,
    Interrogations, Confessions and denials, Confrontations, and
    Witnesses, Letters, Advices, and Instructions given to the
    Enemies, and acknowledged by him, and all what the Solliciter
    General hath produced. Sentence of the 22 of this Month, by
    which it was ordered, that in the absence of the Peers of
    ~France~ summoned, it should be further proceeded to Judgment
    Conclusions of the Kings Sollicitor, the accuser being heard
    and interrogated, all things being duly considered, hath been
    concluded, that the said Court hath declared, and declareth the
    said Duke of ~Biron~, attainted and convicted of high Treason,
    for the conspiracies by him made against the Kings Person and
    Estates, Proditions and Treaties with his Enemies, when he
    was Marshal of the Army of the said King, for reparation of
    which Crime, the said Court hath deprived and depriveth him
    of all his Estates, Honours and Dignities, and hath condemned
    and condemneth him to be beheaded upon a Scaffold, which for
    that purpose shall be erected in the place of ~Greve~, hath
    declared, and declareth, all and every one of his Goods,
    moveable or unmoveable, in whatsoever places scituated and
    seated, to be acquired and confiscated to the King, the Mannor
    of ~Biron~, deprived for ever of the Title and Dukedom and
    Peerage, and altogether all his other Goods, immediately holden
    from the King, reunited to the Crown again. Done in Parliament
    the last day of ~July 1602~. Signed in the Original by ~de
    Belieure~, Chancellor of ~France~, Councillor in the Court,
    Reporter of the Process.

He was not moved at these words, attainted and convicted of high
Treason, but at these, against the Person of the King, he fell into
a rage, and Swearing as he had done many times before, and shall do
hereafter with great Oaths and Imprecations, there is no such thing, said
he to the Recorder, it is false, blot out that; he was also very angry,
hearing that he was to be executed in the place of Greve, thinking that
for several respects he was to be distinguished from the common sort of
people, and Swore again, that he would not go thither, and that he had
rather to be torn in pieces by wild Horses, and that it was not in the
power of all those that stood by to carry him thither, then he was a
little appeased, when Voisin told him, that the King had done him that
favour to change the place of Execution, and that it was to be done in
the Bastille. The confiscation of his Goods, and the revenues of the
Dukedom of Biron to the Crown, was the last point of the Sentence that
vexed him. What? said he, doth the King intend to grow rich out of my
poverty? The Lordship of Biron cannot be confiscated, I only possessed
it by substitution of my Brethren, what shall my Brethren do, the King
ought to have been satisfied with the loss of my life.

The Sentence being pronounced, Voisin did exhort him again to renounce
all the vanities of the world, to take no other care but of the
Salvation of his Soul, which was to be first by reconciling himself to
God Almighty, and that there was two Divines for that purpose, and that
according to the usual forms of Executions, he would be pleased to suffer
himself to be bound. That word of Execution did seem so horrid to him,
that he fell into a new rage, Swearing, that he would never permit so
infamous a person to touch him, otherwise than with the Sword, and that
he had rather be hewen in pieces. To keep him from falling into a further
despair, Voisin left him, with his Divines, viz. Garnier Almonec,
and Confessor to the King, and after that Bishop of Montpelier, and
Magnan, Curate of St. Nicolas in the fields at Paris, who began
to talk boldly to him of his death, and to disvest himself of all his
thoughts, as he had done of his Goods, and to take no other care than
that of his Soul, whereupon he fell into a passion again, Let me alone
(said he) it is I that must think upon my Soul, you have nothing to do
with it, I had no need of you, you shall not be troubled to hear my
confession; what I speak aloud is my confession, I have been these eight
days a confessing my self, and the last night, me thought I saw the
Heavens opened, and that God lent me his Hand; my Keepers heard me laugh
for joy in my sleep. The Divines did not loose Courage for all that, but
more and more intreated him to consider, that he was no more what he had
been before, that within one or two hours he should be no more, that he
must change to be for evermore, that his Soul was ready to appear before
the fearfull Throne of the living God, to be rewarded with a more happy
life than that he had hitherto passed; or be condemned to an Eternal
pain and that in comparison of that which he was to suffer now, it was
no more than the slight pricking of a Pin, and having in some measure
appeased him, they left him to examine his Conscience, while Voisin
went to give notice of his refusing to be bound; the Chancellor doubted
whether he should be compelled to it; the first President said, that it
was dangerous to let him loose; Sillery having learned of Voisin that
the Prisoner was at that time very quiet, said, that if they went about
to bind him, he would break all the bonds of Patience, and should never
be brought to Execution but in a rage and dispair; according to that
opinion he was left free in his body, that he might be the more free in
his thoughts.

Which were more to the World, and to the setling of his affairs, than to
the saving of his Soul, which he had neglected all his life time, and
shewed himself utterly ignorant of the principles of his Religion, for
which he said a little before, he was put to death, and those that were
present related, that his Prayers made him appear more a Souldier than a
Christian; he prayed in commanding, and commanded in praying.

His Confession being ended, he walked in the Chappel with one hand upon
his side, and with the other holding the strings of his Shirt, did
unbutton and button again his Doublet. Voisin being come back told
him, that the Chancellor and the first President were very glad to hear
of his Patience, and of his constant resolution to die. He talked much
of the Money he had at Dijon, of the worth of his Jewels, and of what
was owing to him, and what himself did owe, he desired that some Sums of
Money should be paid to certain Gentlemen, that had no Obligation for it:
But still he broke forth into exclamations concerning his Innocency, and
execrations against la Fin, asking if it should not be lawfull for his
Brothers to prosecute him, and to cause him to be burnt.

Upon this, those that kept him during his Imprisonment, came to take
their leave of him, every one having his left hand upon the handle of his
Sword, and Tears in his Eyes, he moved them to compassion by the sight of
his present condition, and exhorted them to serve the King faithfully,
against whom he had said he had done nothing amiss, and complained that
he could find no Mercy at his Hands, intreated them to pray to God for
him, and to oblige them to that, distributed among them all his Cloaths
and linnen, and Watches; he desired also the Knight of the Watch to tell
the King, that his Servants knew nothing of his Affairs, that the Earl of
Auvergne was not to be questioned upon that account: He intreated much
one exempt of the Guards to go to the said Earl, and tell him he had laid
nothing to his charge, and that he went to die without any grief, but of
the loss of his friendship, and that the shortness of his life would not
give him leave to shew in effect how much he was his servant. The Earl
sent him word, that he did accept of his farewell, as of an intimate
friend; and that he remained behind to lament all the days of his life
the loss he suffered in him, intreated him to leave him his Bastard Son,
to have him brought up with his own Children. After this the Prisoner saw
a Gentleman belonging to the Duke of Mayene, and entreated him to tell
his Master, that if ever in his life he had given him some occasion not
to love him, that he prayed to believe that he would die his servant, as
also of the Duke of Aiguillon, and Earl of Sommerive his Children; he
likewise intreated Arnaut, Secretary to the Marquess of Rhosny, to
remember his last commendations to his Master, and desire him to remember
not so much him that went to die, as his Brethren whom he left behind,
that he had him in opinion of a good and usefull servant to the King, and
repented much he had not believed his Councel.

About three of the Clock the Chancellor and the first President went
up again into the Chappel, and finding him in a good disposition, did
fortifie his resolution by their discourses, and desiring to know more
particularities from his own mouth, sent all the standers by away, except
the Divines and the Recorder: They did exhort him to consider, that the
days of man are limited, that the end of his days depended from the
Providence of the Almighty, who would take him out of this world before
some great and long misery should make him weary of it. He answered, no,
no my Lords, do not trouble you about comforting me and strengthning me
against the fear of death, I have not been afraid of it these 20 years;
you have given me 40 days to study it, but I could not believe that
having not been in the power of my Enemies to take away my life, I should
be so miserable as to loose it by the consent of my friends; having said
this they left him, and took their leaves of him with Tears in their
Eyes, he would not suffer them to depart till they had received a new
Protestation of his, that he never had attempted any thing against the
King, Swearing, that if he would have done it, the King should not have
been alive three years ago.

As they were going out of the Bastille with Sillery, he sent the
Knight of the Watch to intreat the Chancellor, that his Body might be
buried at Biron, in the Sepulchre of his Ancestors, and that he would
desire the King to give to his younger Brother some Office in the house
of the Dolphin, and shewing by his Countenance, Carryage, and Words, to
care as little for death as one that is a great way from it gave cause to
suspect, that he was not out of hope to obtain his pardon from the King,
or to escape by some extraordinary means.

The Divines did exhort him to keep nothing back of what might serve for
the discharging of his Conscience, and to consider, that they could give
him absolution for no more than what he did confess. Although, said he,
the King causeth me to die unjustly, nevertheless I have served him with
so much affection and obedience, and I have near my death so much good
will and affection for him, that if I knew any thing against his Person
or State, I would tell it freely, and upon that whispered some things to
his Confessors, which Voisin did presently write.

Being about five of the Clock, Baranton was sent to tell him it was
time to go; let us go said he, seeing I must die, and desired he would
charge his Brothers from him, to remain faithful to the King, and not to
go to Court, till time had blotted, or at least lessened the shame of
his death. He kneeled before the Altar, and having ended his Prayer, he
desired the Company to pray for him.

Coming out of the Chappel, he met the Executioner, who offered to follow
him, and he thinking it was to bind him; keep off, (said he) and do not
touch me till it be time; I shall go willingly to die without troubling
any body; but it shall never be said that I am dead like a Slave, or
a Thief, and swore by God that if he came near him he would strangle
him. The Divines exhorted him going down the stairs to resist those
impaciencies and temptations of the Devil, who striveth most to deviate
the Soul from her Salvation, when as he hath most need of the Divine
assistance to withstand his assaults, remonstrating also unto him, that
all his violences and passions could not hinder the Soul to depart from
a place where she was but a Tenant at Will. He hearkened to them, and
saying three times ah, ah, ah, raising his voice at every one, he said,
is there no Mercy in the world, I see to day, that all the world hath
forsaken me.

He came into the Yard, and seeing the Lieutenant of the City, in whose
house the King had put la Fin, to secure him from all attempts, My Lord
Lieutenant (said he) I am very much your friend, take heed to have any
thing to do with that Witch and Magician that lyeth at your house, if you
meddle with him he will undo you.

The Scaffold was set up in the corner of the Yard, over against the
Garden gate, six foot high, and seven long, without any Ornament or
distinction. He kneeled upon the first step, lifted up his Eyes to Heaven
and made a short Prayer, like a Souldier, and went up as couragiously
as if he had gone to an assault, clad in a Gray Taffety Suit, with a
black Hat on his Head, but as soon as he saw the Executioner, he looked
furiously upon him, and bid him stand aside till he were ready to receive
the last stroke: He threw his Hat, his Handkarchief, and Doublet to the
first that would take it, nevertheless one of the Executioners men was
nimbler than all the rest, and looking upon the Souldiers that kept the
Gate armed, with Musquets and Fire-locks. Ah! said he, must I die? is
there no pardon? if at least some of those good fellows would shut me
(opening his Breast) he should oblige my very much, what pity is it to
die so miserably, and of so shameful a blow, then directing his speech
to the Spectators, he said, I have put my Soul into such a state as she
ought to be to appear before the face of Almighty God, but I pity that
of the King, who causeth me to die unjustly: I have erred I confess,
but I never attempted anything against the Kings Person, he should have
been dead ten years ago if I would have believed the evil Councel that
was given me concerning that the trouble and distress of his Soul was so
great, that a little while before he said three years, and now he says
ten; the Divines having setled him a little once more, he received their
absolution.

The Executioner then presented unto him a Frontlet, but it proved to him
a new wound, an increase of grief, and swore if he toucht him any other
way than with the Sword he would strangle him, & thereupon he asked
again for his own Handkarchief to make use of it, his hollow and gastly
Eyes shewed he was not in his right mind. Voisin intreated him to be
patient, and to raise his thoughts to the place where his Soul was to go,
and to be attentive to the reading of his Sentence. He was unwilling to
hear the repetition of his Crimes, and to have occasion to exclaim again
against the Iniquitie, of those that had condemned him, against the Kings
cruelty, as he called it, that would not grant him his pardon, and that
this was to make him feel death before death. Voisin answered, that it
could not be done otherwise. He answered that every body knew for what
reason he was there and then as if it were by confession, he said, well,
read, and thereupon held his Peace till Voisin came to these words,
for having attempted against the Kings Person; for then he fell into a
passion again, as he had done before, and said, that it was false, that
this never came into his mind, that as God was his Judge, he would be for
ever deprived of his Grace if it were true, that since two and twenty
Months he had done nothing against the Kings service, that it is true he
had written some Letters, but that the King had forgiven him, protesting
and calling the Spectators to Witness, that it was the truth what he
spoke, as he would answer it before God, and spoke so many words, and so
fast that neither he nor the Sheriff could be understood.

The Sentence being read, the Divines did admonish him to leave all
Earthly thoughts, to implore the assistance of Heaven, and to resign his
Soul to the Eternal providence of the Almighty, and his Body to what the
Law had ordained of it, he made some Prayer to God, and bound his Eyes
with his own Handkarchief, and asked the Executioner in what place he was
to put himself, the Executioner pointing with his finger, said, there
my Lord; he pulled off his Handkarchief in a rage, and where is that
there, said he? thou seest I am blind fold, and thou shewest me as if I
could see; he bound himself again, and bid the Executioner to dispatch
quickly: The Executioner told him he ought to kneel, for fear he should
do something amiss. No, no, said he, I shall not stir, if thou canst not
do it at one blow do it at thirty, he was intreated again to kneel, which
he did, and spoke these Imperious words, dispatch, dispatch, then rose
up again, and untied his Handkarchief, and by casting his Eyes upon the
Executioner, made the people believe, that either he had a mind to seize
upon the Sword, or that he was terribly afrighted by the approaches of
Death, and began again his former complaints, is there no pardon? must
I die so miserably? after so many services. The Executioner intreated
him to suffer his hairs behind to be cut off; he began to swear again
fearfully, that if he toucht him otherwise than with the Sword, he would
strangle him. The Divines told him that he was too carefull of his Body,
he would hear no more of that, but fell into a rage, and swore, that he
would not be toucht by so Infamous a Person as long as he was alive, that
if they did provoke him too much, he would strangle half the Company, and
oblige the other half to kill him, those that were upon the Scaffold went
down and left him with the Executioner, who repented himself heartily
that he had taken the care of him unbound.

The Divines went up again upon the Scaffold, and desired him for the
love of God to resolve to step over that pass, which was necessary for
every man to do, and with some few other words, whispered into his ears,
did calm him a little, and made him resolve to undergo the Execution,
after he had made many complaints, and shewed great fears of dying. A
strange thing that as stout and valiant a man as ever was born, who had
so many times cast himself amongst the greatest dangers, without any fear
or apprehension, as if there was no death for him, should shew himself
now so fearful at the coming of it; we may judge by this, that the
apprehension of death is incomparably greater when it cometh upon a cold
blood, and those that know what his Chirurgion was wont to say, shall
less wonder at it; for he said, that the Duke of Biron used to wonder
at himself, that being not afraid of the thrust of a Sword, nevertheless
he was very timerous at the pricking of a Launcet, when he had occasion
to be let blood: Whereupon we must confess, that the greatest courage,
and most undaunted stoutness of a man, is nothing in comparison of human
Natures weakness.

The Divines judging him to be out of fear, gave him his last absolution,
he kneeled again, and cried aloud three times, My God, my God, my
God, have Mercy upon me, then turning to the Executioner, he took the
headband that he had in his hand, and intreated Baranton to do him
that last curtesie as to lift up his hairs behind, which Baranton
did, and the Duke himself did tie the Handkarchief about his Eyes. The
Divines seeing him in that good disposition, did assure him, that he
was ready to go to Heaven, and to see God, and to enjoy his Glory. Yes,
said he, Heaven is open to receive my Soul, and so stooped his neck for
the Executioner to do his office. The Executioner considering, that he
had untied himself three times before, and might do so again for the
fourth, thought fitting to entertain him with fair words, to desire his
forgiveness, and to put him in mind of saying his last Prayer, in the
mean time he beckened to his man, who was at the foot of the Scaffold,
to reach him the Sword, which no sooner was in his hand, but the Duke of
Birons Head was off his Shoulders, it fell from the Scaffold to the
ground, and was thrown again by the Executioners man upon the Scaffold,
the Body was stript to its Shirt, and wraped in a Sheet, and the same day
buried, about nine of the Clock at night, in St. Pauls Church, without
any shew or Ceremony. Thus ended the Tragical History of the Duke of
Biron.

Now follows the two last Verses of this Prophecie.

    A Post overtaken in the Countrey,
    And the Scrivener shall cast himself into the Water.

Which as we have said before, were concerning Nicolas L’oste, Secretary
to the Lord Villeroy, chief Secretary of State. The History therefore
is thus.

The French Embassador at Madrid, complained once to Henry the
IV. he was so ill informed, and so late of Affairs, that the King of
Spain’s Ministers knew them before him: The King was a great while
troubled before he could discover the spring of that infidelity, at last
it came out in this manner. Villeroy that great Oracle of France,
and the most confident Secretary to the King, had among his servants
one Nicolas l’Oste, born at Orleans, in whom he did confide so much
the more, because his Father had been the most part of his life in his
service.

The Lord Rochepot going Embassador into Spain, Oste desired to be
admitted into his Family, to serve him as his secretary, that he might
the better fit himself for publick employment. Villeroy’s commendation
got him easily that employment, by which in a few Months he became so
capable of the Spanish Tongue and manners, that no body could have
distinguished him from a natural Spaniard. The Embassador having sworn
in the name of the most Christian King the treaty of Peace made at
Veruins, the King of Spain presented him with a rich Chain of Jewels,
and with six other of Gold, valued at 150. Crowns apiece, to bestow upon
as many of his own servants as he should think fit.

The pride and presumption of this young man was such as to perswade him
he deserved one of them, and chiefly because one of his fellows was
thought worthy of it, but his Master did not think so, and thus he was
neglected.

Thus envy and jealousie were the Windows by which the Devil crept into
his soul; the vanity, lying, pride, and debauchery gave him a full
admittance, he had spent all his Money to buy the love of a Courtisane,
and wanted means to follow that course which he had no mind to leave off.
His Masters neglecting of him, had extraordinarily vexed him, but he
comforted himself that he knew his secrets, and that in revealing them to
the King of Spains Ministers he shot two Birds with one shot; for he
should avenge himself of that contempt he had received, and should have a
way to continue his amorous expences. With that intention he made himself
known to Don Franchese one of the Secretaries of State, and told him
what means he had to serve the King of Spain, and to shew him proofs of
that service and affection he had vowed to him long before, by imparting
to him all the Letters that the Embassador did both send and receive from
the King his Master.

Don Franchese heard this proposition as from a young man, whose Brains
were not well settled, or perhaps did abhor such infidelity, therefore
told him coldly, that the Catholick King was in so good amity with the
most Christian one, that he desired to know no more of his business, than
what his Embassador should tell him.

L’Oste did not despond for all this, but went to Don Ydiaques another
Secretary of State, who knowing how important it is for a Prince to know
the secrets of his Neighbours, and that the slighting of such an offer
would be prejudicial to the King his Masters Service, did hearken unto
this Traitor, approved of his design, and exhorted him to persevere in
the good affection he shewed to the King of Spains service, promised to
acquaint the King with it, and to procure him such a reward, as he should
have reason to be satisfied with.

The Councel agreed that L’Oste should be incouraged, and Don
Ydiaques, presented him to the Duke of Lerma, to whom he shewed
the Alphabet of Cyphers, with which his Master writ his Letters into
France, and for a further proof unciphered the last Letter that the
King of France had sent. The Duke exhorted him to continue his good
Will, gave him 1200. Crowns for an earnest of the Bargain, with a promise
of as much for a yearly pension, besides a considerable gratification he
was to expect from the King.

Since that time the French Embassador received no Letters but they
were presently imparted to the Spanish Councel: But the Lord la
Rochepot being called back into France, L’Oste lost the conveniency
of prosecuting his Treasons, and consequently the hopes of his promised
reward, therefore sought means to come again into his first Masters,
that is, Villeroy’s service, but he was a while kept back from it by
reason of a difference between his Mother and Villeroy, about some
rest of Accounts; but L’Oste had rather take that loss upon him than
to be deprived of that occasion. The Embassador himself gave him a large
Testimony Of his ability and faithfulness, and was Instrumental for his
re-admission into that service.

Thus being re-established, he became more diligent and sedulous than ever
before, and not only writ more Letters than any of his fellows, but also
offered them his service to help them, that he might have a more perfect
knowledge of all transactions, and so impart them to the Spaniard,
and so visited and conferred with Taxis the Spanish Embassador at
Paris, and after that with his successor, Don Baltazar de Cuniga,
with so much cunning and secrecy, that the Councel of Spain received
his Letters, before des Barreaux the French Embassador at Madrid,
could receive those of the King.

Des Barreaux sent word to the King, that when he propounded any thing,
according to his Majesties command, to the Councel of Spain, he found
them always preadvised, and could not find out by what means; certainly
said the King, there must be some in my Councel that keep a strict
intelligence with the Spaniard, and I can not tell whom to suspect.
Providence doth often draw good effects out of the worse causes, and
permitteth that the wicked should disclose one anothers wickedness, as
a Nail driveth out another. Loste had revealed himself familiarly to
one Raffis, formerly Secretary to the Lord Lansac, a fugitive into
Spain, for many Treasons, and exempted from pardon; but the Spaniard
had begun to cut him short of his former Pensions, since the Treason of
the Baron of Fontanelles, Governour of Dornavenest in Brittanny,
in which the said Raffis had been a principal Actor, though in vain,
so that since, the Councel of Spain looked upon him as an unprofitable
servant, and withdrew their Pension.

Raffis finding himself near a great want and misery, thought this
occasion might be a means to prevent it, and to procure his return into
his native Countrey, by doing so great a service to his Prince; therefore
he went to one of the French Embassadors most faithful servants, and
told him his grief, for having had a share in so many Treasons and
Rebellions in France, which he acknowledged God had into his particular
protection, that he was resolved to blot out the memory of them by a
notable service done to the King and Kingdom, but that could not be,
unless he had first obtained pardon for all his former misdemeanors.

This being told to the Embassadour, he heard Raffis, who told him in
general that the King was betrayed, and his most secret Councel bewrayed,
but that he could not name the Traitor, no not to his Majesty himself,
before he had his pardon: that being done, he would wholly withdraw
himself from those whom he knew certainly to be enemies to the Kingdom.
The Embassadour sent an express to the King to give him notice of it. The
King sent him full power to treat with Raffis, with promiss to ratifie
whatsoever he should promiss to Raffis; Raffis could not make good
his accusation, but by two Letters written by Loste, to a great friend
of his, named Blas, which Letters he knew to be in a Box of Blas,
who lodged with him; therefore upon some pretext or another, they found
means to send Blas as far as l’Escurial. In his absence Raffis and
Descardes Secretary to the Embassadour, broke open the Box, and took
out the Letters, by which Loste did much magnifie the liberalities of
Spain, as being above his desert and expectation; with this proofs
and the Embassadors Letters, Raffis fained to go to a Monastery near
Madrid, and there make his devotions upon Palm-Sunday, as he was wont
to do, but he went directly to Bayone, where he met with Discardes
upon a set day. Blas came back after Palm-Sunday, and finding his Box
open, and his companion run away, he suspected the matter, and gave
notice of it to the Spanish Ministers, who presently dispatched two
Courriers to the Spanish Embassador at Paris, to give him notice
that a man was gone from Madrid; who would discover Loste and his
practises, therefore he should give him notice of it, and bid him look to
himself, and that in case he should be taken, to keep secresie.

Descardes and Raffis came to Paris the Wensday after Easter, and
carried themselves with all faithfulness in this occasion, but not with
all the prudence that could have been desired. Villeroy was going the
same day to lie at his own House, between Paris and Fountain-bleau,
where the Court was then; they met with him at Juvisy, and waited on
him as far as Villeroy, but told him nothing of the occasion of their
coming by the way, till they presented him with the Embassadors Letters,
which was a notable fault, for he would certainly have neglected all
other business to secure his man, who was then doing his devotions at the
Charter-house of Paris.

The next day Villeroy was the first that told the King of the coming of
Raffis, and of the perfidiousness of his own servant. As he was going
back to his Lodging, notice was given him that two Spanish Courtiers
were arrived at the Post-house; he commanded one of the Commissioners
of the Post-house, that he should cause them to withdraw into a Room,
and that no body should speak with them; he charged also Descardes,
that he should spy the coming of Loste, that he should keep him close
company, and send him presently notice of his arrival. The Commissioner
and Descardes did commit here another great fault, for Loste being
come to the Post-house about noon, this silly Commissioner told him that
there were arrived two Spanish Courtiers who asked for him, that they
had Letters for him, and more then that, suffered him to go into their
Chamber and see them, he saluted them, and one of them whispered him in
the ear that he was undone if he did not save himself presently, and
that Raffis had discovered him; fear and astonishment with his guilty
conscience, persuaded him easily to look to himself.

Nevertheless, he settled his countenance the best he could, he went out
with an intention to take his Horse again, which he had sent before, and
so save himself; Descardes and Raffis perceived him, Descardes came
and saluted him, and thinking perhaps that he was strong enough to give
an account of him, neglected to send word to Villeroy, who was then
in his Closet with the Bishop of Chartres; Descardes presence was a
great thorn in Loste’s foot, to be rid of him, he said he was going to
his Master, who stayed for him; Descardes offered to accompany him: he
answered, he had not dined, and that believing it was past Dinner time
at home, he would go into some Cabaret to look for a Dinner, the other
answered I have not dinned neither, we shall dine together. Loste found
another excuse, and said my Boots hurt me, I pray give me leave that
I may go and pull them off; Descardes answered, he must needs drink
with him. Thus arguing together, they came to Villeroy’s Lodging,
where Descardes thinking to have him sure, left him in the Room, not
knowing that the Spanish Courtiers had talked with him, and came near
the Closet to give notice of it to Villeroy; but as soon as he saw
himself rid of Descardes, he went down into the Stable, and finding
his Horse yet Sadled he Mounted, and with all speed rid to Paris;
Villeroy in the mean time having notice that his man was come, he
commanded they should bring them in; but he was not to be found, nor his
Horse neither, no body knowing which way he was gone. Villeroy told
the King that his man was escaped, they sent after him on all sides, and
Villeroy particularly sent all his Servants after into all the ways.
Loste coming to Paris about nine of the Clock at night, went to take
counsel of the Spanish Embassadour, and before day, went out habited
like a Spaniard, with the Embassadors Steward, and took his way towards
Meaux, with an intent to get into Luxembourg by Poste.

That every one might endeavour the apprehending of that Traitor, it was
spread abroad that one of Villeroy’s Secretaries had attempted upon
the Kings Person, and notice was given of his Stature, Age, Cloaths and
Horse. The Sheriffs of every Countrey were in quest, and all Post-Masters
were forbidden to let out any Horses, but that of Meaux had notice
of it too late; Loste was got on Horseback already, but assoon as he
began to gallop, his Horse fell to the ground, and was an ill Omen
to the Rider; he got up again, and shewed so much fearfulness in his
Countenance, that the Postillion himself thought he had committed some
notorious villany, which he did run for. Being come home, he gave
notice of it to his Master, who suspecting him to be the man enquired
off, he gave notice of it to the Sheriff, who presently made after him
at the second Ferry of la Ferte soubs Jouare, where he was Crossing
the River; the Sheriff cried after the Ferry man to come back, but
the fear of his life, which the two run aways put him into, prevailed
upon him, above the Sheriffs commands, being got over, and judging that
their Post-Horses should be quickly overtaken by those of the Sheriff,
they forsook them and the Postillion; and trusted to their heels in the
darkness of the night among the Bushes and Brambles that are upon the
River Marne. The Sheriff scattered his men all about, caused fires to
be made, and raised up all the Countrey people thereabout; the Spaniard
ran over the Champion Countrey, and Loste went from Bush to Bush, and
whether accidentally or wilfully he fell into the River Marne, where he
was drowned; the next day his Hat was found between two posts, and his
body two days after not far from that place.

Thus you may plainly see the full event of those two famous Prophecies,
contained in this sixth Stanza.


VII.

    French.

    La Sangsue au Loup se joindra,
    Lors qu’en Mer le bled defaudra,
    Mais le grand Prince sans envie,
    Par Ambassade luy donra,
    De son bled pour luy donner vie,
    Pour un besoing s’en pourvoira.

    English.

    The Leech will joyn it self to the Wolf,
    When in the Sea Corn shall be wanting,
    But the great Prince without envy,
    By Embassy shall give him,
    Of his Corn to give him life,
    Of which in his need he shall make provision.

ANNOT.

By the Leech is understood the Spaniard. By the Wolf is meant the
French, by reason of the multitude of those Creatures in that Kingdom;
the meaning therefore of this Prophecy is, that there should be a great
famine in Spain, wherein the Spaniard should be constrained to
make his application to the French for relief of Corn, which should
be granted him. This happened in the year 1665 for you must understand
that most of these last Prophecies were to be fulfilled in the Reign of
Henry IV.


VIII.

    French.

    Un peu devant l’ouvert commerce,
    Ambassadeur viendra de Perse,
    Nouvelle au Franc Pais porter,
    Mais non receu vaine esperance,
    A son grand Dieu sera l’offense,
    Feignant de le vouloir quitter.

    English.

    A little before that Trade shall be open,
    An Embassador shall come from Persia,
    To bring news into France,
    But he shall not be received, O vain hope!
    To his great God shall the offence be,
    Faining that he would leave him.

ANNOT.

In the year 1608. the year before the Truce was concluded between the
Spaniard and the Hollanders, by which all free Commerce was opened
through Europe. The King of Persia being then in War with the great
Turk, sent an Embassador to all the Christian Princes, and chiefly into
France, to move them to make a diversion in so fit a time, but he could
prevail nothing, and went back again re infecta, which he thought to be
a great injury done to his Prophet Mahomet.


IX.

    French.

    Deux Estendars du costé de l’Auvergne,
    Senestre pris, pour un temps prison regne,
    Et un Dame enfant voudra mener,
    An Censuart, mais discouvert l’affaire,
    Danger de mort, murmure sur la Terre,
    Germain, Bastille, Frere & Sœur prisonier.

    English.

    Two Standards in the County of Auvergne,
    The left one taken, for a while Prison shall reign,
    And a Lady shall endeavour to carry a child
    To the Censuart, but the plot being discovered,
    Danger of Death, murmur upon Earth,
    Own Brother, Bastille, Brother and Sister prisoners.

ANNOT.

This Stanza being most obscure and difficult, cannot be understood so
well by parcels, as by laying down the whole Synopsis of it, which I do
the more willingly, because I think it will be delightful to the Reader,
and that the whole being known, the meaning of every particular will
easily be understood.

Charles the IX. King of France, the last of the House of Valois
left only one natural Son, called the Earl of Auvergne, who had a
Sister by the Mothers side, that was called Henrietta de Balzac
Duchess of Verneuil, once Mistriss to Henry the IV. by whom she had
upon promiss of marriage one Son, at this time Duke of Verneuil, and
Governour of Languedoc; but this promiss being made void by Act of
Parliament, Henry IV. married Mary of Medicis, by which he had
issue Lewis the XIII. and other children: now upon the discontent
of the Marshal of Biron, the Dutchess of Verneuil, the Earl of
Auvergne her Brother, and their party joyned with him for the promoting
of the Duke of Verneuil’s interest to the Crown, whereupon the King
sent for the Earl of Auvergne, who was then in his County a hundred
Leagues from Paris; but the Earl trusting more the good will of the
Citizens of Clermont in Auvergne who loved him, then to the Kings
Clemency, neglected to come, whereupon the King sent again the Lord
d’Escures, with a pardon for what was past; he promised to come when
he should see his pardon Signed and Sealed in good form; the King was
offended at his proceeding, and took it very ill that a Subject of his
would capitulate with him, who intended to deal plainly and sincerely;
the King nevertheless past that over for many considerations, one of
them was that the Earl was of the blood of France, and brother by the
Mother to one that had been his Mistress, besides that he was a Prince
endowed with many good qualities, most of which did Sympathise with those
of the King, thus the King sent him his Pardon as well for what was
past, as for the present, but with this proviso that he should come; for
all this, he did not stir out of Clermont; the King seeing that, did
resolve to have him at any rate: there was several propositions made for
to take him: at Hunting, at running of the Ring, at some Banquet, in the
Fields, in the City; all these ways might be suspected by the Earl, but a
new one was found out, of which he himself was the Author; the Troop of
the Duke of Vendosme was preparing for to Muster, the Earl intreated
d’Eurre Lieutenant of the said company, that it might be in the Fields
by Clermont towards Nonnain, because he intended to take revenge
in the behalf of a Lady, upon the Inhabitants of that place. The King
sent directions and orders to d’Eurre, how he should govern himself
in that action, and gave him for Associates, la Boulaye, Lieutenant
of the Marquess of Verneuil’s Troop, and Nerestan Colonel of a Foot
Regiment. By the Kings advice they imparted the business to the Viscount
of Pont du Chasteau, to the Baron of Canillac and some others, that
had authority in that Province, and were devoted to the Kings service,
and all keeping religiously the Laws of silence. The 12 of November the
Troop met at the Rendezvous; the Earl came thither by times with two only
of his followers, thinking that the Troop should not be ready so soon,
and so he should have pretext either to go back to Clermont, or to go
on further to visit his Mistress. The prudence and diligence of those
that managed the business did prevent him, and begot a suspition in him,
for he was seen to truss up his Cloak and to try whither his sword did
not stick to the Scabbard. D’Eurre went to him, and having complemented
him rode on his left hand, while the Troop was setting in order;
Nerestan came to salute him on the other side, and rode on his right
hand, being followed by three stout Souldiers, habited like Lackeys, and
appointed for this action. The Viscount of du Pont du Chasteau and his
brother rode out of the Troop and encompassed him on all sides. One of
the Souldiers laid hold on the Horses Bridle; d’Eurre at the same time
laid hold on his Swords Hilt, saying, my Lord, we are commanded by the
King to give him an account of your person, and we intreat you to submit
unto his Majesties good pleasure, that we may have no occasion to use
you otherways then we desire. Maison-ville and Liverne who were his
two followers drew their Swords, thinking to make him way to escape, but
some shot spent upon them, made them presently retire and run away. He
was put upon a Trumpeters Nag as far as Briare, and thence conducted to
Montargis in a Coach, and afterwards by water to Paris and put in the
Bastille.

By this History, and the explication of the word Censuart, which is an
ancient word derived from the Latine word Censor; and taken here for
the Kingly office, the whole Prophecy is easily understood, and obvious
to the meanest capacity.


X.

    French.

    Embassadeur pour une Dame,
    A son Vaissau mettra la rame,
    Pour prier le grand Medecin,
    Que de l’Oster de telle peine,
    Mais a ce s’opposera Roine,
    Grand peine avant qu’en voir la fin.

    English.

    An Embassador for a Lady,
    Shall set Oares to his Ship,
    To intreat the great Physition,
    To take her out of such pain,
    But a Queen shall oppose it,
    A great deal of trouble before the end of it.

ANNOT.

This Prophecy is concerning Mary Stuart Queen of Scots put in Prison
by Queen Elizabeth, who is called here the opponant Queen, to the
Embassy that the said Queen of Scots sent for relief to the King of
France, called here the great Physitian.


XI.

    French.

    Durant le Siecle on verra deux ruisseaux,
    Tout un terrouer inonder de leurs eaux,
    Et submerger par Ruisseaux & Fontaines,
    Coups, & Monfrein, Beccoyran & Alais,
    Par le Gardon bien souvent travaillez,
    Six cens & quattre, Ales & trente Moines.

    English.

    In this Age two Rivolets shall be seen,
    To overflow a whole Countrey with their waters,
    And to drown by Rivolets and Fountains,
    Coups, and Monfrein, Beccoiran and Alais,
    By the Gardon often troubled,
    Six hundred and four Alais, and thirty Monks.

ANNOT.

An Age is the space of one hundred years, the meaning therefore of this
is, that within the Age following, his Prophecies namely as he saith
after, in the year 1664. there shall be great Inundation in Languedoc,
caused by the overflowing of two small Rivers, besides that of Gardon,
which Inundation shall drown these following places, Coups, Monfrein,
Becoyran and Alais, besides, and Abbey wherein there was 30. Monks,
but of this I could find nothing in the History, therefore those that
live about those places must make it good.


XII.

    French.

    Six cens & cinq tres grand nouvelle,
    De deux Seigneurs la grand querelle,
    Proche de Gevaudan sera,
    En une Eglise apres l’offrande,
    Meuttre commis, prestre de mande,
    Tremblant de peur se sauvera.

    English.

    In six hundred and five shall be great news;
    The quarrel of two great Lords,
    Shall be near Gevaudan,
    In a Church after the Offering,
    A murder committed, the Priest shall ask,
    And quaking for fear, shall save himself.

ANNOT.

This (like the former) is a particuler accident, of which the publick
History taketh no notice; it seemeth that in the year 1665. in
Gevaudan, a Province of France near Languedoc, there was a great
quarrel between two Lords who meeting at Church, did about the time of
the Offering set one upon another, and one of them was killed, whereupon
the Priest being terrified, ran away.


XIII.

    French.

    L’aventurier, six cens, & six ou neuf,
    Sera surpris par fiel mis dans un Oeuf,
    Et peu apres sera hors de puissance,
    Par le puissant Empereur General,
    Qu’ou Monde nest an pereil ny esgal,
    Dont un chascun luy rend obeissance.

    English.

    The adventurer, six hundred, six or nine,
    Shall be surprised by Gall put into an Egge,
    And a little while after shall be out of power,
    By the potent Emperour General,
    To whom in the world there is not his like or equal,
    Wherefore every one yieldeth obedience to him.

ANNOT.

This Prophecie was concerning the Duke of Savoy and Henry the IV. for
about that time mentioned by the Author, after the death of Marshal de
Biron, who sided with the Duke of Savoy (which death is called here
Gall put into an Egg;) the Duke of Savoy refused to perform the treaty
concerning the restitution of the Marquisate of Saluces, wherefore
Henry the IV. went and subdued most of his Countrey, and compelled him
to give the Province of Bresse instead of the said Marquisate.


XIV.

    French.

    Au grand Siege encor grand forfaits,
    Recommenceant plus que jamais,
    Six cens & cinq sur la verdure,
    La prise & reprise sera,
    Soldats es Champs jusqu’ en froidure,
    Puis apres recommencera.

    English.

    At the great Siege yet great misdemeanors,
    Beginning again more than ever,
    Six hundred and five about the Spring,
    The taking and retaking shall be,
    Souldiers in the fields till Winter,
    And after that shall begin again.

ANNOT.

This Stanza is about the same subject as the precedent. By the great
Siege here is meant the Siege of Montpelian, the strongest place in
Savoy, which Henry the IV. took, and by it compelled the Duke of
Savoy to an agreement. The rest is easie.


XV.

    French.

    Nouveau esleu Patron du grand Vaisseau,
    Verra long temps briller le grand flambeau,
    Qui sert de Lampe a ce grand territoire,
    Et auquel temps Armées soubs son nom,
    Jointes a celles de l’heureux de Bourbon,
    Levant, Ponant, & Couchant sa memoire.

    English.

    The new elected Master of the great Ship,
    Shall a great while see the great light shine,
    Which serveth for a Lamp to this great Territory,
    And at which time Armies under his name,
    Joyned with those of happy of Bourbon,
    East, West, and North his memory shall be.

ANNOT.

The three first Verses are concerning Clement the VIII. who was elected
Pope about that time, and was Instrumental to make a Peace between the
King of France and the Duke of Savoy, and was Pope a good while.

By the great Ship is meant the Church, of which he is called Master. The
rest is easie.


XVI.

    French.

    En Octobre Six cens & cinq,
    Pour voieur du Monstre Marin,
    Prendra du Souverain le cresme,
    Ou en six cens & six en Juin,
    Grand joye aux Grands & au Commun,
    Grand faits apres ce grand Baptesme.

    English.

    In October six hundred and five,
    The Purveyor of the Sea Monster,
    Shall take the unction of the Sovereign,
    Or in six hundred and six in June,
    Great joy shall be to the Great ones, and to the Commons,
    Great feats shall be after this great Baptism.

ANNOT.

In the year 1606. the 14 of September, instead of which the printer
hath put October, the Dolphin of France, Lewis the XIII. son to
Henry the IV. was Christened with his two Sisters at Fountainbleau,
and because the Ceremonies were extraordinary, and our Author calleth
this a great Baptism, it will not be amiss for the satisfaction of the
curious Reader, to give here succinctly a description of it.

In the great quadrangle of the Castles Yard, was erected a great
Theatre, all spread and hanged with most rich Carpets and Hangings, in
the middle of which Theatre was a square of thirty foot on each side,
with rails about it, all covered with Carpets, in the front of it was
erected an Altar, adorned with the Ornaments belonging to the Order of
the Holy Ghost, behind the Table was a Footstool of three steps, spread
with Carpets, and in the middle of the Footstool was a kind of a Stand,
covered with a Silver Cloth, upon which were the Fount, covered with a
most exquisite Towel, and a Canopy over it, on both sides of the Altars
were two Scaffolds for two Quires of Musick, and a little lower on the
right hand a Bench covered with Carpets for the Prelates to sit, among
which were three Archbishops, nine Bishops and three Abbots, on the
left hand were the Lords of the Councel, and before the Altar was the
Cardinal of Gondy, encompassed with Almoners and Chaplains, and a great
multitude of spectators seated upon Benches, in form of a Theatre, round
about the Theatre were the guard of Switzers, having every one a Torch
in his hand.

The Dolphin and his Sisters were in their Chambers upon Beds of State,
with their Robes lined with Hermines, and were brought to the quadrangle,
the waiting Gentlemen going before with Torches in their hands, with the
Bed Chamber men, and Gentlemen of the Chamber, five Drums, Waits, and
Trumpeters, Heralds, and the Knights of the Holy Ghost, with the three
Honours; in the first, for the youngest Daughter, the Ewer, the Bason,
the Pillow, the Wax Taper, the Chrisme, the Saltseller, were carryed
by the Baron, Son to Marshal de la Chastre, by the Lords Montigny,
la Rochepot, Chemerand, Liencourt, Fervacques, and the Lady was
carryed by the Marshal of Bois Dauphin, followed by Charles Duke of
Lorrain Godfather, and of Don Juan de Medicis, Brother to the great
Duke of Tuscany, representing Christian, Daughter to the Duke of
Lorrain, and Wife of the great Duke. After that followed the Dutches
of Guise, the Countesses of Guiche, of Saulx, the Marchioness
Monlaur, and other Ladies.

The Marshals of Laverdin, and of la Chastre, the Dukes of Silly,
of Monbazon, of Espernon, of Esguillon did the same office for
the elder Lady. The Lord of Ragny carryed her for Diana Dutchess
of Angoulesme, who did represent the Infanta, Clara, Eugenia,
Eusabella, Archidutchess of Austria, followed by the Dutchess of
Rohan, Montmorency, Mayenne.

The third Honour for the Dolphin was carried by the Earl of Vaudemont,
the Knight of Vendosme his elder Brother, the Duke of Mensier, the
Earl of Soissons, and the Prince of County, all three Princes of the
Blood, and the Dolphin was carryed by the Lord Souvray his Governour,
in the room of the Prince of Condé, first Prince of the Blood, who
because of his sickness could do him no other service then to hold him
by the hand. The Duke of Guise carryed his Train, and the Cardinal of
Joyouse followed him, representing the Pope Paul the V. then followed
Eleonor Wife to Vincent Duke of Mantua, and the Princess of the
Blood, all richly attired.

The Dolphin being brought upon the Table of the quadrangle, the Cardinal
of Gondy appointed for this Ceremony, came near him; and having heard
him answer pertinently to the questions asked by the Almoner according to
the usual forms, and to say the Lords Prayer and the Creed in Latine, he
was exercised, appointed, and by the Cardinal of Joyouse Legat, named
Lewis.

The Ladies were afterwards brought upon the Table, and the eldest,
named Elizabeth by the Dutchess of Angoulesme, representing the
Archidutchess her Godmother, without any Godfather.

The youngest was named by Don Juan of Medicis (representing the great
Dutchess) Christierne.

At Supper the King was waited upon by the Princess of his Blood;
the Prince of Condé served for Pantler, the Prince of Compty
for Cupbearer, the Duke of Monpensier for Squire Carver, the Earl
of Soissons for high Steward, the Duke of Guise and the Earl of
Vondemont waited upon the Queen, and the Duke of Sully waited upon
the Legat. The Godfathers sat, and after them the Princesses, Ladies
and Lords of high quality, at the great Ball the Duke of Lorrain did
precede by the Kings order, for the only consideration that he was
Godfather.

The next day there was a runing at the Ring, and at night the Duke of
Sully caused an artificial Castle to be assaulted with an innumerable
quantity of Squibs, Chambers, Canon shots, and other Fire Works, but
never any thing was seen more incredible or wonderful, then the beauty,
ornament and lustre of the Princesses and Ladies of the Court; The Eyes
could not stedfastly behold the splendor of the Gold, nor the brightness
of the Silver, nor the glittering of Jewels; the Princes and Lords did
out vie one another who should be most richly attired, among the rest
the Duke of Espernon had a Sword valued at 30000. Crowns, and upon the
Queens Gown were 32000. Pearls, and 3000. Diamonds.


XVII.

    French.

    Au mesme temps un grand endurera,
    Joyeux, malsain, l’an complet ne verra,
    Et quelques uns qui Seront de la feste,
    Feste pour un feulement, a ce jour,
    Mais peuapres sans faire long sejour,
    Deux se donront l’un l’autre de la teste.

    English.

    At the same time a great one shall suffer,
    Joyful, sickly, shall not see the year compleat,
    And some others who shall be of the feast,
    A feast for one only at that day,
    But a little while after without long delay,
    Two shall knock one another in the head.

ANNOT.

This Stanza hath relation to the precedent, for about the time of, or a
little before that famous Christning died Pope Leo the IX. formerly
called Cardinal of Florence, who did not live a whole year in the
papacy; and is called here Joyful, Sickly, because though infirm, he
did much rejoyce in the obtaining of it; those others that were of the
Feast, were some Cardinals of his party, who died also within the same
year.

The two last Verses signifie the differences that happened, between
Paul V. his Successor, and the Common-wealth of Venice presently
after his death.


XVIII.

    French.

    Considerant la triste Philomele,
    Qu’en pleurs & cris sa plainte renouvelle,
    Racourcissant par tel moyen ses jours,
    Six cens & cinq elle en verra l’yssue,
    De son tourment, ia la toile tissue,
    Por son moien senestre aura secours.

    English.

    Considering the sad Philomela,
    Who in tears and cries reneweth her complaint,
    Shortning by such means her days,
    Six hundred and five shall see the end,
    Of her torment, then the Cloath Woven,
    By her sinister means shall have help.

ANNOT.

This sad Philomela was Henrietta of Balzac Daughter to Francis of
Balzac, Marquess of Entragues, and Mistress to Henry the IV. who
being found guilty of a Conspiracy against the State, was confined to the
Abbey of the Nuns of Beaumont lez Tours, where she was seven Months,
after which the King taking pitty of her, passed a Declaration, wherein
in respect of his former Love, and of the Children that he had by her,
he forgave her all what was past, did abolish and suppress for ever the
Memory of the Crime that she was accused off, and did dispense her from
appearing before the Parliament, who in her absence did Register her
Letters of Pardon the 6. of September 1605. Thus Reader you may see how
punctual was our Author in his Prognostications.


XIX.

    French.

    Six cens & cinq, six cens & six & sept.
    Nous monstrera jusques l’an dixsept,
    Du boutefeu l’Ire, haine & envie,
    Soubs l’Olivier d’assez long temps caché,
    Le Crocodil sur la Terre a caché,
    Ce qui estoit mort sera pour lors en vie.

    English.

    Six hundred and five, six hundred and six and seven,
    Will shew us unto the year seventeen,
    The anger of the bontefeu, his hatred and envy,
    Under the Olive-Tree a great while hidden,
    The Crocodile upon the ground hath hidden,
    What was dead, shall then be alive.

ANNOT.

This Stanza is so difficult, signifieth nothing but the confusions that
have happened in France from the year 1605. to the year 1617. which
would be too tedious and prolix here to relate, the Reader may see them
in the French History.


XX.

    French.

    Celuy qui a par plusieurs fois,
    Tenu la Cage & puis les bois,
    Rentre a son premier estre,
    Vie sauve pen apres sortir,
    Ne se scachant encor cognoistre,
    Cherchera subject pour mourir.

    English.

    He that hath many times,
    Been in the Cage and in the Woods,
    Cometh again to his first being,
    And shall go out a little after with his life safe,
    And not able yet to know himself,
    Shall seek a subject to be put to death.

ANNOT.

This is yet concerning the Earl of Auvergne half Brother to the
Dutchess of Verneuil, who for his misdemeanours having been put several
times in the Bastille, and set free again, nevertheless was attempting
still some new thing, which might have endangered his life.


XXI.

    French.

    L’Autheur des maux commencera Regner,
    En l’an fix cens & sept sans espargner,
    Tous les subjects qui sont a la Sangsüe,
    Et puis apres s’en viendra peu a peu,
    Au franc Païs rallumer son feu,
    S’en retournant d’ou elle est issue.

    English.

    The Author of evils shall begin to Reign,
    In the year six hundred and seven, without sparing,
    All the subjects that belong to the Leech,
    And afterwards shall come by little and little,
    To the free Countrey to kindle again his fire,
    Going back again from whence it came.

ANNOT.

The Author being a zealous Roman Catholick, calls here the Hollanders
the Authors of evils, who in the year 1607 and 1608. made a grievous War,
and had several successes against the Spaniard, with the help of the
French and English, till the year 1609. when by the mediation of the
French and English Embassadors, the Truce was concluded at Antwerp,
between the Arch-duke and the States of the United Provinces, the
Articles of it to the number of 38. were solemnly proclaimed and
published the ninth of April, and ratified by the King of Spain in
the Month of July next ensuing.


XXII.

    French.

    Cil qui dira descouvrisant l’affaire,
    Comme du mort, la mort pourra bien faire,
    Coups de Poniards par un qu’auront induits,
    Sa fin sera pis qu’il n’aura fait faire,
    La fin conduit les homines sur la Terre,
    Gueté par tout, tant le jour que la nuit.

    English.

    He that shall say discovering the business,
    How of the dead, can make a death well,
    Strokes of a Dagger by one that hath been induced to it,
    His end shall be worse then he hath caused to be done,
    The end leadeth all men upon the Earth,
    Espied every where, as well by day as by night.

ANNOT.

This Stanza is wholly abstruse and Enigmatical, therefore I will not
pretend to expound it, but leave the interpretation to those that have
more time and leasure then I.


XXIII.

    French.

    Quand la grand Nef, la prove & Gouvernail,
    Du franc Pais, & son Esprit vital,
    Descueils & slots par la Mer Secovée,
    Six cens & sept & dix cœur assiegé,
    Et des reflux de son corps afflegé,
    Sa vie estant sur ce mal renovée.

    English.

    When the great Ship, the Prow, and Rudder,
    Of the French Countrey, and her vital Spirit,
    Being tossed by Baks and Waves,
    Six hundred and seven, and ten, a heart beset,
    And by the ebbing of his body afflicted,
    Her life being upon this, evil knotted again.

ANNOT.

This Stanza signifieth the great troubles that were in France from the
year 1610 in which Henry the IV. died, to the year 1617. in which the
Marshal d’Ancre was killed.

This man was named Concino Concini a Florentine born, who in a little
time was grown very great, and from a base extraction had ascended to
the dignity of Marshal of France, by the favour of the Queen Regent
Mary of Medicis, and grew so rich, that he offered to the King to
maintain at his own charge 6000. foot, and 800. Horses for four Months
together; he had made himself Master of many strong Places in Picardy
and Normandy, went about to buy the Government of several Provinces,
did dispose of the Kings Exchequer at his pleasure, and spent vast sums
of money at his Masters charge. His insolencies were the cause of his
ruine, when he thought least of it; for he threatned every one with words
and deeds, so far as to say, that he would cause them to eat up their
fingers, that should oppose his Will, and so caused many Officers and
Souldiers of the contrary party to be put to death. The King Lewis
the XIII. was particularly informed of the unsufferable pride and
misdemeanors of this Marshal, and that his design was to keep up the War
in France, to continue his Authority and Power; therefore the King
commanded Vitry, the Captain of his Guards, to apprehend him. This was
a difficult thing, because that the Marshal (besides his Menial servants)
had always twelve Guards wearing his Livery, that were desperate fellows;
there was also another difficulty, because no body could tell, when or
at what time he would come to the Louvre; nevertheless at last he came
to it, upon the 24. of April 1617. attended with a great Train and
his Guards; the great Gate was opened to him, and presently shut again,
Vitry drew near to him, and holding his staff to him, said, I arrest
you in the Kings name, upon these words the Marshal stept back, as if
it were to make resistance, saying, Me? whereupon those that were with
Vitry shot three Pistols at him, one did hit him in the Heart, the
other in the Head, and the third in the Belly, so that he fell down dead
immediately upon his left side, a certain Lord that was on his right hand
speaking with him, fell down also without any hurt, but his followers
seeing him dead run away.

This death was the cause of great alteration, in the publick Government.
The body of the said Marshal was buried at St. Germain de l’Auxerrois,
but the people digged it out, and dragged it to the new Bridge, where
they hanged it by the feet upon a Gibbet, having cut off his Nose,
his Ears and his privy parts, then they took him down, and dragged him
through the Town, and afterwards burnt it. Thus did perish he that was
worth about two Millions of Pounds Sterling, and pretended to make his
house perpetual and Sovereign. The new Officers that had governed the
State from the 24 of November to the 24 of April 1617. were arrested
in their houses, and the old ones put in again, and the Princes called
back again to the Court.


XXIV.

    French.

    Le Mercurial non de trop longue vie,
    Six cens & huit & vingt, grand maladie,
    Et encor pis danger de feu & d’eau,
    Son grand amy lors luy sera contraire,
    De tels hazards se pourroit bien distraire,
    Mais bref, le ser luy sera son Tombeau.

    English.

    The Mercurial not too long lived,
    Six hundred and eight and twenty, a great sickness,
    And what is worse a danger of fire and water,
    His great friend then shall be against him,
    He might well avoid those dangers,
    But a little after, the Iron shall make his Sepulcher.

ANNOT.

This is concerning Lewis the XIII. King of France, who fell
dangerously sick of the Plague at Lions, about the year 1628. after
that went with his Army into Savoy, where he escaped many dangers of
fire and water. As for the Verse it must not be understood, as if he had
been killed, but that the cares he took about his Armies should shorten
his days. The fourth Verse is to be understood of the Lord Bellingham,
then favorite to the King, who forsook him in his sickness, for which he
was afterwards disgraced, and could never come into favour again.


XXV.

    French.

    Six cens & six, six cens & neuf,
    Un Chancelier gros comme un Bœuf
    Vieux comme le Phœnix du Monde,
    En ce Terroir plus ne luira,
    De la Nef doubly passera,
    Au Champs Elysiens faire ronde.

    English.

    Six hundred and six, six hundred and nine,
    A Chancellor big as an Oxe,
    Old as the Phœnix of the World,
    Shall shine no more in this Countrey,
    Shall pass from the Ship of forgetfulness,
    Into the Elysian Fields to go the round.

ANNOT.

Six and nine joyned together makes 15. the meaning of this therefore is,
that about the year 1615. should die the Chancellor of France, who was
then Nicolas Brulart Lord of Sillery a very corpulent man.


XXVI.

    French.

    Deux freres sont de l’ordre Ecclesiastique,
    Dont l’un prendra pour la France la pique,
    Encor un coup si l’an six cens & six,
    N’est afflige d’une grand maladie,
    Les Armes en main jusques six cens & dix,
    Gueres plus loing ne s’estendant sa vie.

    English.

    Two Brothers are of the Ecclesiastical Order,
    One of which shall take up the Pike for France,
    Once more, is in the year six hundred and six,
    He be not afflicted with a great sickness,
    The Weapons in his hands till six hundred and ten,
    His Life shall reach not much further.

ANNOT.

In the year 1606. there was two Brothers of the House of Joyeuse, one
called Francis Cardinal of Joyeuse, and the other a Capuchin Frier,
the rest of the Brothers being dead without issue; Father Angel got a
dispensation from the Pope to go out of his Covent, and to Marry, that
the Family might not be extinguished, and so turned Courtier and Souldier
again, till he had got a Daughter, who was afterwards married to the Duke
of Guise; after that, remembring his Vows, he turned Capuchin again,
and a little while after died, coming from Rome to Paris.


XXVII.

    French.

    Celeste seu du costé d’Occident,
    Et du Midy courir jusqu’au Levant,
    Vers demy morts sans point trouver racine,
    Troisiesme Age a Mars le Belliqueux,
    Des Escarboucles on verra briller feux,
    Age Escarboucle, & a la fin famine.

    English.

    A Cœlestial fire on the West side,
    And from the South shall run to the East,
    Warm, half dead, and incapable to find Roots,
    The third Age to Mars the Warriour,
    Out of Carbuncles fires shall be seen to shine,
    The Age shall be a Carbuncle, but in the end famine.

ANNOT.

This signifies nothing but the troubles that were all France over, from
the year 1620. to the year 1628. when Rochel was taken, and the great
famine that was in the year 1626.


XXVIII.

    French.

    L’An mil six cens & neuf ou quatorziesme
    Le vieux Charon sera Pasques en Caresme,
    Six cens & six par escrit le mettra,
    Le Medecin de tout cecy s’estonne,
    A mesme temps assigné en personne,
    Mais pour certain l’un deux comparoistra.

    English.

    In the year a thousand six hundred and nine or fourteen,
    The old Charon shall Celebrate Easter in Lent,
    Six hundred and six shall put it in writing,
    The Physician wondereth at all this.
    At the same time being Cited in person,
    But for certain, one of them shall appear.

ANNOT.

This signifieth that about the time mentioned by the Author, some great
one should be very sick in Lent, and should eat flesh, which is called
here to Celebrate Easter in Lent; and that his Physician wondering
at it should fall sick himself, and that without fail, one of them two
should die.


XXIX.

    French.

    Le Griffon Se peut apprester,
    Pour a l’ennemy resister,
    Er renforcer bien son Armée,
    Autrement l’Elephant viendra,
    Qui d’un abord le surprendra,
    Six cens & huit, Mer enflammée.

    English.

    The Griffin may prepare himself,
    To resist the Enemy,
    And to strengthen his Army,
    Otherways the Elephant shall come,
    Who on a sudden shall surprise him.
    Six hundred and eight, the Sea shall be inflamed.

ANNOT.

By the Griffin was meant the Hollanders, who were warned here to beware
of the Elephant, that is, the Spaniard, and to strengthen their Army
for fear of being surprised.

The last Verse signifieth, that in the year 1608. there should be a
notable Sea-fight, which was then frequent enough between the said
Hollanders and Spaniard.


XXX.

    French.

    Dans peu de temps Medicin du grand mal,
    Et la Sangsue d’ordre & rang inegal,
    Mettront le feu a la branche d’Olive,
    Poste courir d’un & d’autre costé,
    Et par tel feu leur Empire accosté,
    Se rallumant du franc finy salive.

    English.

    Within a little while the Physician of the great disease,
    And the Leech, of order and rank unequal,
    Shall set fire to the branch of Olive,
    Posts shall run to and fro,
    And with such fire their Empire acquainted,
    Shall kindle again with the French finished spittle.

ANNOT.

By the Physitian of the great disease, is meant the King of France;
and the Leech the King of Spain, so that it is foretold here, how they
shall set fire to the branch of Olive, that is, shall break the Peace and
fall to War, which in the year 1636. when upon the imprisoning of the
Archbishop of Triers by the King of Spain, because he had put himself
under the French Protection, the King of France sent an Armv of
40000. men in the Low-Countreys, to come with the Prince of Orange at
Mastricht, which quarrel hath continued till the Marriage of the King
of France with the Infanta of Spain, Daughter to Philip the IV. The
last Verse is forced in, only to make up the rime.


XXXI.

    French.

    Celuy qui a les hazards surmouté,
    Qui fer, feu, eau, na jamais redouté,
    Et du Pais bien proche du Basacle,
    D’un coup de fer tout le Monde eftonné,
    Par Crocodil estrangement donné,
    Peuple ravy de voir un tel spectacle.

    English.

    He that hath overcome the dangers,
    That hath never feared Iron, Fire nor Water,
    And of the Countrey near the Basacle,
    By a stroke of Iron (all the World being astonished),
    By a Crocodile strangely given,
    People will wonder to see such a spectacle.

ANNOT.

This Prophecy may admit of two Interpretations; the first, that
Henry the IV. who was born in the Province of Bearn, not far from
Thoulouze, the chief City of Languedoc, wherein there is a place upon
the River called Basacle, where the Mills are, who was stobbed with a
knife by Francis Ravillac in the year 1610.

The other is of the last Duke of Montmorency, who being Governour of
Languedoc, took up Arms against the King, in the behalf of the Duke of
Orleans, for which he was beheaded at Thoulouse at the solicitation
of Cardinal Richelieu, which happened about the year 1632.


XXXII.

    French.

    Vin a foison tres-bon pour les Gendarmes,
    Pleurs & soupirs plaintes, cris, & alarmes,
    Le Ciel fer ses Tonnerres pleuvoir,
    Feu, eau, & sang le tout meslé ensemble,
    Le Ciel de Sol en fremit & en tremble,
    Vivant na veu ce quil pourra bien voir.

    English.

    Plenty of Wine, very good for Troopers,
    Tears, and sighs, complaints, cries, and alarums,
    Heaven shall cause its Thunders to rain,
    Fire, water and blood, all mixed together,
    The Suns Heaven, quaketh and shaketh for it,
    No living man hath seen what he may see then.

ANNOT.

This great plenty of Wine happened in the year 1634. at which time there
was in France such plenty of Grapes, that half of them perished for
want of Vessels to put them in, and I remember very well, that then
whosoever would bring a Poinchon Vessel, which is the third part of a
Tun, might have it filled with Grapes for half a Crown, and that being
my self at that time at a Town of Burgundy, called Beaune, where
the best Wine of France groweth, four of us had one Pottle of Wine
English measure for one half penny. The rest signifieth no more but
the miseries that happened in Germany, by the Wars that the King of
Sweden brought in about the same time.


XXXIII.

    French.

    Bien peu apres sera tres-grand misere,
    De pou de Bled qui sera sur la Terre,
    De Dauphiné, Provence & Vivarois,
    Au Vivarois est un pauvre presage,
    Pere du fils sera Antrophophage,
    Et mangeront Racine & gland du Bois.

    English.

    A little after shall be a great misery,
    Of the scarcity of Corn that shall be upon the ground
    Of Dauphine, Provence, and Vivarois,
    In Vivarois is a poor presage,
    Father of son shall be Antropophage,
    And shall eat Roots and Acorns of the Wood.

ANNOT.

This came to pass when the Duke of Rohan headed the Protestant party,
and made those Provinces the seat of the Civil Wars in France, about
the year 1640. or 1642.


XXXIV.

    French.

    Princes & Seigneurs tous se feront la guerre,
    Cousin Germain, le Frere avec le Frere,
    Finy l’Arby de l’heureux de Bourbon,
    De Hierusalem les Princes aimables,
    Du fait commis enorme & execrable,
    Se ressentiront sur la bourse sans fond.

    English.

    Princes and Lords shall war one against another
    Cousin German, the Brother against the Brother,
    The Arby finished of the happy Bourbon,
    The Princes of Hierusalem so lovely,
    Of the enormous and execrable fact committed
    Shall ressent upon the bottomless Purse.

ANNOT.

This foretelleth of the Wars that were to be between the Princes and
Lords a little after the death of Henry the IV. when the Marshal
d’Ancre took upon him the administration of affairs by the favour of
the Queen Regent Mary of Medicis.


XXXV.

    French.

    Dame par mort grandement atristée,
    Mere & tutrice au lang qui la quittée,
    Dame & Seigneurs faits enfants Orphelins,
    Par les Aspics & par les Crocodiles,
    Seront surpris forts bourgs, Chasteaux & Villes,
    Dieu tout puissant les garde des malins.

    English.

    A Lady by death greatly afflicted,
    Mother and Tutor to the Blood that hath left her,
    Ladies and Lords made Orphans,
    By Asps and by Crocodiles,
    Shall strong holds, Castles and Towns be surprised,
    God Almighty keep them from the wicked.

ANNOT.

That great Lady afflicted by death, and Mother and Tutor to the Blood
that left her was Mary of Medicis, Wife to Henry the IV. who after
the death of her Husband was much troubled in her regency by her own Son
Lewis the XIII. and several great Lords of his party whence did follow
the Battle of Pont de Cé.


XXXVI.

    French.

    La grand rumeur qui sera par la France,
    Les impuissans voudront avoir puissance,
    Langue emmiellée & vrais Cameleons,
    De boutefeus, allumeurs de chandelles,
    Pyes & Geais, rapporteurs de nouvelles,
    Dont la morsure semblera Scorpions.

    English.

    The great rumor that shall be through France,
    The impuissants would fain have power,
    Honey Tongues, and true Camelions,
    Bourefeux, and lighters of Candles,
    Magpies and Jays, carriers of news,
    Whose biting shall be like that of Scorpions.

ANNOT.

This hath a relation to the precedent, and expresseth further the misery
of those times.


XXXVII.

    French.

    Foible & puissant seront en grand discord,
    Plusieurs mourront avant faire l’accord,
    Foible ou puissant vainqueur se fera dire,
    Le plus puissant au jeune cedera,
    Et le plus vieux des deux decedera,
    Lors que l’un d’eux envahira l’Empire.

    English.

    The Weak and powerfull shall be at great variance,
    Many shall die before they agree,
    The weak shall cause the powerful to call him Victor,
    The most potent shall yield to the younger,
    And the older of the two shall die,
    When one of the two shall invade the Empire.

ANNOT.

This Prophecie is not come to pass yet (for all I know) therefore I leave
the interpretation to every ones liberty.


XXXVIII.

    French.

    Par Eau, & par fer & par grand maladie,
    Le Pourvoieur a l’hazard de sa vie,
    Scaura combien vaut le Quintal de Bois,
    Six cens & quinze ou le dixneufiesme,
    On gravera d’un grand Prince cinquiesme,
    L’Immortel nom sur le pied de la Croix.

    English.

    By Water, by Fire, and by great sickness,
    The Purveyor to the hazard of his life,
    Shall know how much is worth the Quintal of Wood,
    Six hundred and fifteen, or the nineteen,
    There shall be graven of a great Prince the fifth,
    The immortal name upon the foot of the Cross.

ANNOT.

By the Purveyor is meant the King of France, as we have said before.

The great Prince the V. was Paul the V. who was foretold he should die
about the year 1615. 1619.


XXXIX.

    French.

    Le Pourvoieur de Monstre sans pareil,
    Se sera voir ainsy que le Soleil,
    Montant le long la ligne Meridienne,
    En poursuivant l’Elephant & le Loup,
    Nul Empereur ne fit jamais tel coup,
    Et rien plus pis a ce Prince n’avienne.

    English.

    The Purveyor of the Monster without equal,
    Shall shew himself like the Sun,
    Ascending in the Meridional line,
    In persecuting the Elephant and the Wolf,
    No Emperour did ever such an act,
    I wish nothing worse may happen to that Prince.

ANNOT.

This is a Prophecie of the glorious success that Lewis the XIII. was to
have against the Spaniard in Italy, and the Protestant party at home.


XL.

    French.

    Ce qu’en vivant le Pere n’avoit sceu,
    Il acquerra ou par guerre ou par feu,
    Et Combatra la sangsue irritée,
    Ou jouira de son bien paternel,
    Et savory du grand Dieu Eternel,
    Aura bien tost sa Province heritée.

    English.

    That which while he lived the father did not know,
    He shall get it either by Water or by Fire,
    And shall fight with the angry Leech,
    Or shall enjoy his Paternal goods,
    And be favorised by the great Eternal God,
    Shall quickly become Heir of his Province.

ANNOT.

This concerneth the present King of France Lewis the XIV. who hath
lately got by Fire and Sword those Provinces in the Low Countreys, to
which he laid claim by his Wives Title, which his father never knew nor
attempted.


XLI.

    French.

    Vaisseaux Galeres avec leur Estendar,
    Sentrebattront pres du Mont Gilbatar,
    Et lors sera forfait a Pampelonne,
    Qui pour son bien souffrira mille maux,
    Par plusieurs fois soustiendra les assaux,
    Mais a la fin unie a la Coronne.

    English.

    Ships and Galleys with their Standard,
    Shall fight near the Mountain Gilbatar,
    And then shall be endeavoured against Pampelonne,
    Which for her good shall suffer a thousand evils,
    And many times shall resist the assaults;
    But at last shall be united to the Crown.

ANNOT.

This Prophecieth the reduction of the City of Pampelona, the chief City
of the Kingdom of Navarre, under the obedience of the King of France
and Navarre.


XLII.

    French.

    La grand Cité ou est le premier homme,
    Bien amplement la ville ie vous nomme,
    Tout en alarme, & le Soldat es Champs,
    Par Fer & Eau grandement affligée,
    Et a la fin des Francois soulagée,
    Mais ce sera des six cens & dix ans.

    English.

    The great City where the first man is,
    Fully I name the Town to you,
    Shall be alarmed and the Souldier in the field,
    Shall be by Fire and Water greatly afflicted,
    And at last shall be helped by the French,
    But it shall be from six hundred and ten years.

ANNOT.

That great City where the first man is, is Amsterdam, because the first
Letter and the last Sylable of it maketh Adam: But of her affliction
by Fire and Water, and of her being relieved by the French in the year
1610. I can find nothing in the History; those that are better furnished
with Books than I am, may chance to satisfie themselves and others,
better than I can do.


XLIII.

    French.

    Le petit coin Provinces mutinées,
    Par forts Chasteaux se verront dominées,
    Encor un coup par la gent Militaire,
    Dans bref seront fortement assiegez,
    Mais il seront d’un tres grand soulagez,
    Qui aura fait entrée dans Beaucaire.

    English.

    The little corner, Provinces revolted,
    By strong Castles, shall see themselves commanded,
    Once more by the Military Troops,
    Within a little while shall be strongly Besieged,
    But shall be helped by a great one,
    That hath made his entry in Beaucaire.

ANNOT.

This little Corner and Provinces revolted are Holland, and the rest of
the United Provinces, who are threatned here with many troubles, as they
did suffer till the Peace of Munster.

That great man that helped them, was the King of France.


XLIV.

    French.

    La belle Rose en la France admirée,
    D’un tres-grand Prince a la fin desirée,
    Six cens & dix lors naistront ses amours,
    Cinq ans apres sera d’un grand blessée,
    Du tract d’Amour elle sera enlassée,
    Si a quinze ans du Ciel recoit secours.

    English.

    The faire Rose admired in France,
    Shall at last be desired by a great Prince,
    Six hundred and ten, then shall her love begin,
    Five years after she shall be wounded,
    With the love of a great one she shall be intangled,
    If at five years she receiveth help from Heaven.

ANNOT.

This Prophecy was concerning the Match between Lewis the XIII. and
Ann of Austria Infanta of Spain, who were both Married very young.


XLV.

    French.

    De coup de fer tout le Monde estonné,
    Par Crocodil estrangement donné,
    A un bien grand, parent de la Sangsue,
    Et peu apres sera un autre coup,
    De guet a pens commis contre le Loup,
    Et de tels faits on en verra l’yssue.

    English.

    All the World being astonished at a blow of Iron,
    Strangely given by a Crocodile,
    To a great one, kin to the Leech,
    And a little while after another blow,
    On purpose given against the Wolf,
    And of such deeds the end shall be seen.

ANNOT.

I think this needeth no further explication, then that I have given upon
the 31. Stanza.


XLVI.

    French.

    Les Pourvoieux mettra tout en desroute,
    Sangsue & Loup, en mon dire escoute,
    Quand Mars sera au Signe du Mouton,
    Joint a Saturne, Saturne a la Lune,
    Alors sera ta plus grande infortune,
    Le Soleil lors en exaltation.

    English.

    The Purveyor shall put all in disorder,
    Leech and Wolf, do ye hearken to me,
    When Mars shall be in the Sign of Aries,
    Joyned with Saturn, and Saturn with the Moon,
    Then shall be thy greatest misfortune,
    The Sun being then in its exaltation.

ANNOT.

This is plain, if you remember that by the Purveyor is meant the King of
France, by the Leech the King of Spain, and by the Wolf the Duke of
Savoy.


XLVII.

    French.

    Le grand d’Hongrie ira dans la Nacelle,
    Le nouveau né sera guerre nouvelle,
    A son voisin, qu’il tiendra assiegé,
    Et le noireau avec son Altesse,
    Ne souffrira que par trop on le presse,
    Durant trois ans ses gens tiendra rangé.

    English.

    The great one of Hungary shall go in the Boat,
    The new born shall make a new War,
    To his Neighbour, whom he shall Besiege,
    And the black one with his Highness,
    Shall not suffer to be overpressed,
    During three years he shall keep his Men in order.

ANNOT.

This is concerning the King of Bohemia, and his War with the Emperour,
who is called here the great one of Hungary, because he is King of it;
the black one with his Highness, is the Pals-grave, who after three
years broils was defeated at the Battle of Prage.


XLVIII.

    French.

    Du vieux Charon on verra le Phœnix,
    Estre premier & dernier des fils,
    Reluire en France, & d’un chascun aimable,
    Regner long temps, avec tous les honneurs,
    Qu’auront jamais eu ses Predecesseurs,
    Dont il rendra sa gloire memorable.

    English.

    The Phœnix of the old Charon shall be seen,
    To be the first and last of the Sons,
    To shine in France, beloved of every one,
    To Reign a great while with all the honours,
    That ever his Predecessors had,
    By which he shall make his glory memorable.

ANNOT.

No doubt but this is meant of some King of France, which is to come.


XLIX.

    French.

    Venus & Sol, Jupiter & Mercure,
    Augmenteront le genre de nature,
    Grande Alliance en France se fera,
    Et du Midy la Sangsue de mesme,
    Le feu esteint par ce remede extreme;
    En Terre ferme Olivier plantera.

    English.

    Venus and Sol, Jupiter and Mercury,
    Shall augment humane kind,
    A great Alliance shall be made in France,
    And on the South the Leech shall do the same,
    The fire extinguished by this extreme remedy,
    Shall plant the Olive-Tree in a firm ground.

ANNOT.

By the consent of all Astronomers, those four benigne Planets augment
generation.

That great Alliance mentioned here, by which the fire was extinguished,
and the Olive-Tree planted in a firm ground, is the Marriage of the
present King of France, Lewis, the XIV. with the Infanta of Spain,
by which all differences were composed, and the Peace firmly settled.


L.

    French.

    Un peu devant ou apres l’Angleterre,
    Par mort de Loup mise aussy bas que terre,
    Verra le feu resister contre l’eau,
    Le rallumant avecque telle force,
    Du sang humain, dessus l’humaine escorce,
    Faute de pain, bondance de cousteau.

    English.

    A little while before or after, England,
    By the death of the Wolf being put as low as the ground,
    Shall see the fire resist against the water,
    Kindling it again with such force,
    Of humane blood, upon the humane bark,
    That want of bread and abundance of knives shall be.

ANNOT.

The meaning is, that a little while after or before the said match
mentioned in the foregoing: England was or should be brought as low as
the ground, and that there should be abundance of humane blood spilled,
and a great decay of Trade, with Wars, which is that he calleth, Want of
Bread and abundance of knives.


LI.

    French.

    La Ville qu’avoit en ses ans,
    Combatu l’Injure du temps,
    Qui de son Vainqueur tient la vie,
    Celuy qui premier la surprit,
    Que peu apres Francois reprit,
    Par Combats encore affoible.

    English.

    The City that had in her years,
    Resisted the injury of the times,
    And oweth her life to him that overcame her,
    Being the first that surprised it,
    Which a little while after Francis took again,
    Being yet weakened with fightings.


LII.

    French.

    La grand Cité qui n’a Pain a demy,
    Encor un coup la saint Barthelemy,
    Engravera au profond de son Ame,
    Nismes, Rochelle, Geneve & Montpelier,
    Castres, Lion, Mars entrant au Belier,
    S’entrebattront le tout pour une Dame.

    English.

    The great City that hath not bread half enough,
    Shall once more engrave
    In the bottom of her soul St. Bartholomew’s day,
    Nismes, Rochel, Geneva and Montpelier,
    Castres, Lion, Mars coming into Aries,
    Shall fight one against another, and all for a Lady.

ANNOT.

That great City mentioned here, is Paris, which is threatned of another
St. Bartholomew’s day, which was fatal to the Protestants in France,
for upon that day in the year 1572. there was a general Massacre made
of them through all France, insomuch, that in Paris alone there was
above ten thousand slain.

As for those Towns here named that are to fight about a Lady, I cannot
guess what Lady it should be, unless he meaneth the Roman Church.


LIII.

    French.

    Plusieurs mourront avant que Phœnix meure,
    Jusques six cens septante est sa demeure,
    Passé quinze ans, vingt & un, trente neuf,
    Le premier est Subjet a maladie,
    Et le second au fer, danger de vie,
    Au feu a l’eau est subjet a trenteneuf.

    English.

    Many shall die before that Phœnix dieth,
    Till six hundred and seventy he shall remain,
    Above fifteen years, one and twenty, thirty nine,
    The first shall be subject to sickness,
    And the second to Iron, a danger of life,
    Thirty nine shall be subject to fire and water.

ANNOT.

By the Phœnix is meant a Pope, because there is but one of that kind at
once, the meaning of the rest is unknown to me.


LIV.

    French.

    Six cens & quinze vingt, grand Dame mourra,
    Et peu apres un fort long temps pleuvra,
    Plusieurs Pais Flandres & l’Angleterre,
    Seront par seu & par fer affligez,
    De leurs Voisins longuement assiegez,
    Contraints seront de leur faire la Guerre.

    English.

    Six hundred and fifteen, and twenty, a great Lady shall die,
    And a little after it shall rain for a great while,
    Many Countreys as Flanders and England,
    Shall by fire and Iron be afflicted,
    And a good while Besieged by their Neighbours,
    So that they shall be constrained to make War against them.

ANNOT.

What that great Lady was, that should die in the year 653. is not easie
to guess, there being many in every Countrey that died that year. The
rest is easie, and we have seen the truth of it in our days, and may see
it hereafter.


LV.

    French.

    Un peu devant ou apres tres grand’ Dame,
    Son ame au Ciel, & son corps soubs la lame,
    De plusieurs gens regretée sera,
    Tous ses parens seront en grand tristesse,
    Pleurs & souspirs d’une Dame en jeunesse,
    Et a deux grands le dueil delaissera.

    English.

    A little while before, or after, a very great Lady,
    Her soul in Heaven, and her body in the Grave,
    Shall be lamented by many,
    All her kindred shall be in great mourning,
    Tears and sighs of a Lady in her youth,
    And shall leave the mourning to two great ones.

ANNOT.

This may be understood of the death of Anna of Austria, Queen of
France, who left in mourning two great ones, viz. her two Sons
Lewis the XIV. King of France, and Philip of Bourbon Duke of
Orleans.

Or of the death of the Queen Dowager of England, Henrietta Maria,
who also was much lamented, and left in mourning two great ones, viz.
Charles the II. King of England, and James Duke of York his
Brother.


LVI.

    French.

    Tost l’Elephant de toutes parts verra,
    Quand Pourvoyeur au Griffon se joindra,
    Sa ruine proche, & Mars qui tousiour gronde,
    Fera grands faits aupres de Terre Sainte,
    Grands Estendars sur la Terre & sur l’Onde,
    Si la Nef a esté, de deux frere enceinte.

    English.

    Shortly the Elephant on all sides shall see,
    When the Purveyor shall joyn with the Griffin,
    His ruine at hand, and Mars which always grumbleth,
    Shall do great feats near the Holy Land,
    Great Standarts upon the Earth and the Sea,
    If the Ship hath been with Child of two Brothers.

ANNOT.

The Elephant is the Emperor, the Purveyor the King of France, the
Griffin the Hollanders; the meaning then is that the Emperor shall go
to ruine, when the French and the Hollanders shall joyn together.

And that there shall be great Wars and Fightings in the Holy Lands, both
by Sea and Land, when two Brothers of great quality shall go in one Ship.


LVII.

    French.

    Peu apres l’Alliance faite,
    Avant solemnises la Feste,
    L’Empereur le tout troublera,
    Et la nouvelle Mariée,
    Au Franc Païs par sort liée,
    Dans peu de temps apres mourra.

    English.

    A little after the Alliance made,
    Before the Feast be Solemnized,
    The Emperor shall trouble all,
    And the new Bride,
    Being by fate tied to the French Countrey,
    A little while after shall die.

ANNOT.

This is concerning a match that shall be made between the French King,
and some Lady of another Countrey, which Match shall be disturbed by the
Emperour, and the Bride shall die a little while after her Marriage.


LVIII.

    French.

    Sangsue en peu de temps mourra,
    Sa mort bon signe nous donra,
    Pour l’accroissement de la France,
    Alliances se trouveront,
    Deux grands Roiaumes se joindront,
    Francois aura sur eux puissance.

    English.

    The Leech within a little while shall die,
    His death shall be a good sign to us,
    For the augmentation of France,
    Alliances shall be found,
    Two great Kingdoms shall joyn together,
    The French shall have power over them.

ANNOT.

The Leech was Philip the IV. the last King of Spain, who died a
little while after he had Married his Daughter to Lewis the XIV. now
King of France, by which Marriage the Peace was made between the two
Kingdoms, in the Island of the Conference, upon the Borders of France
and Spain. By his death and that Match is foretold the encrease and
happy condition of the Kingdom of France.


FINIS.

